From the Authors
================

Welcome
-------

Welcome to *Renaissance*, an open-source D%-based fantasy role-playing
game focusing on themes of exploration, intrigue and horror!

About the Setting
-----------------

The setting is an attempt to bring a little bit of Roddenberry-esque
multi-cultural optimism to fantasy role-playing—a genre that very often
features elves, dwarves an humans fighting evil gnolls, orcs and
kobolds. There might be a good reason that most ancient myths cast
strange and wonderful creatures as the *villains*, but modern
story-tellers don’t have to be constrained by those conventions. We’d
rather tell stories about what can happen if a society learns to
*embrace* all those different races and cultures in a way that promotes
the dignity and prosperity of all of its members.

We also want the setting to feel like a plausible state for a plausible
world. This means that it needs to be historically plausible, at least
by comparison to some of the other highly eclectic RPG settings out
there. At the same time, we don’t want to the various races and cultures
in our game to line up too closely with any existing culture or region
from the real world. We don’t want to present players with a
slightly-rebranded medieval Europe; instead, we want to drop players
into a living, alien world.

Also, Instead of looking back, we want to look forward. *Renaissance*
isn’t the story of a world struggling to recover from a global cataclysm
or picking through the ruins of a fallen empire; instead, it’s the story
of a prosperous people on the cusp of a renaissance—or, as one
contributor pointed out, a “Naissance,” since they’re the first major
culture on their world. Their major concerns aren’t mere survival or
looting ruins; it’s the unstable states and hostile empires on their
borders—and the machinations of powerful spirits, and the strange,
wondrous and dangerous things they might discover on their frontiers.
(If we were pulled into “fantasy-horror” as a consequence of the
elements we borrowed from *Eclipse Phase*, it has turned out to be a
rewarding genre to work in.)

About the Game
--------------

To get the most out of the game, it’s important to know what Renaissance
is, and what it *isn’t*.

Role-playing as a hobby combines story- and character-building
creativity with rule-driven strategy—with some players leaning more
towards one than the other. As a game system, Renaissance is intended to
sit somewhere in the middle; the intent is that it provides clear enough
rules that players know what they can and cannot do, so that
strategically-minded players can move five squares, attack with a +20
modifier and do 2d10DV—but that it is also open-ended and flexible
enough that creatively- or cinematically-minded players can climb the
walls of a narrow alley, abseil down a well, kick off a wall to leap
over an opponent, buy their way out of jail, use a their fireball power
to keep themselves warm in the frozen north, shoot a fleeing target in
the leg or break an opponent’s fingers so that they cannot wield a
weapon, all without requiring complex rules or, god forbid, *feat
chains*.

To give as much room for player and GM creativity as we can, we’ve tried
to break the rules and existing content up into well-separated chunks,
so that players can introduce new weapons, races, locations, items and
powers without having to worry about how they interact with fifty pages
of interconnected rules. At many points, we have left many rules
deliberately underspecified and open-ended, to make sure that GMs and
players have maximum flexibility.

What Renaissance is not is a competitor to D&D. We know we’ll never be
as good a hack-and-slash or dungeon-crawler as D&D in its various
generations is, and we’re not trying to be. While we do want to provide
a workable and rewarding system of combat, what we’re really trying to
do—the things we think we do much better than D&D—is provide a
*whole-world* game, and in particular, to support *weird stories* and
*intrigue* as story structures.

About the Book
--------------

Loosely, the “Book”—this website—is broken into three parts.

The first part consists of an “in-world” description of the setting;
more than the other chapters, this one is written from the perspective
of someone “inside” the world. That means that we’ve tried to avoid
referencing things that someone on the *Emerald Plane* wouldn’t know—for
example, we haven’t talked about the planet’s *orbit*, even though
that’s something we thought at least a little about when designing its
seasons.

The second part—starting with *Basic Rules*—contains the mechanical
rules of the game. This describes the basics of a *check*—*Renaissance*
is a skill-check-based game—then it describes the rules for *combat*,
and several of the game’s other “systems”. Finally, it describes how a
character is represented, how characters are built, and lists the
various “character options”—the races, backgrounds and features players
can pick from when building their character.

The third part—starting with *The Five Roles*—contains *guides*,
*examples* and *optional rules*. In these The rules from the second part
may completely describe how the game is supposed to work *mechanically*,
but they don’t really explain how they’re all supposed to fit
together—they don’t explain what a good character is like, what a
campaign is like, what kinds of challenges you’re supposed to face, and
so on. In this section, we fill in some of those details. This chapter
is written far more informally than the other two; here, we the
developers are talking to you the readers about how we designed the game
to work, so that you can make intelligent decisions about how to build
characters or write adventures.
