---
title: From the Authors
---

## <span id="anchor-2"></span>About the Setting

The setting is an attempt to bring a little bit of Roddenberry-esque
multi-cultural optimism to fantasy role-playing; owing to its Eclipse
Phase heritage, it has also proved to support cosmic horror fairly well.

I also want it to feel like the plausible history and current state of a
complete other world. This means that it needs to be historically
plausible, at least by comparison to (for example) ”Points of Light,”
the default Pathfinder setting, which includes everything from the
perpetual French revolution to the Russian steppes to strange
techno-magic warring desert robots. At the same time, I don’t want to
line up with any existing culture or region too closely; this isn’t
re-branded Earth, it’s a whole other world, evolving and developing
under entirely different circumstances.

Finally, instead of looking back, I want to look forward: it’s not the
story of a culture bravely picking up the pieces of a long-lost empire,
rather it’s the story of a prosperous people on the cusp of
renaissance—or, as Runic pointed out, a “Naissance,” since they’re the
first major culture on their world—whose major opponents are other
unstable states, common corruption, and cosmic forces beyond mortal
ken—at least for now.

## <span id="anchor-3"></span>About the Game

To get the most out of the game, it’s important to know what Renaissance
is, and what it *isn’t*.

Role-playing as a hobby combines story- and character-building
creativity with rule-driven strategy—with some players leaning more
towards one than the other. As a game system, Renaissance is intended to
sit somewhere in the middle; the intent is that it provides clear enough
rules that players know what they can and cannot do, so that
strategically-minded players can move five squares, attack with a +20
modifier and do 2d10DV—but that it is also open-ended and flexible
enough that creatively- or cinematically-minded players can climb the
walls of a narrow alley, abseil down a well, kick off a wall to leap
over an opponent, buy their way out of jail, use a their fireball power
to keep themselves warm in the frozen north, shoot a fleeing target in
the leg or break an opponent’s fingers so that they cannot wield a
weapon, all without requiring complex rules or, god forbid, *feat
chains*.

To give as much room for player and GM creativity as we can, we’ve tried
to break the rules and existing content up into well-separated chunks,
so that players can introduce new weapons, races, locations, items and
powers without having to worry about how they interact with fifty pages
of interconnected rules. At many points, we have left many rules
deliberately underspecified and open-ended, to make sure that GMs and
players have maximum flexibility.

What Renaissance is not is a competitor to D\&D. We know we’ll never be
as good a hack-and-slash or dungeon-crawler as D\&D in its various
generations is, and we’re not trying to be. While we do want to provide
a workable and rewarding system of combat, what we’re really trying to
do—the things we think we do much better than D\&D—is provide a
*whole-world* game, and in particular, to support *weird stories* and
*intrigue* as story structures.

