---
title: "The Supernatural"
---

## <span id="anchor-23"></span>Magic

Magic runs throughout the world of the Commonwealth; it is produced and
consumed in countless ways, and bent to numerous ends.

All processes—especially life processes—produce a spiritual essence,
which is simply called *magic*. Get a better name. This energy can be
harnessed and put to use—although this can be difficult, given that it
is fickle and unpredictable, often following arbitrary and bizarre
rules, or operating according to no apparent law at all.

Some can learn to manipulate the magic that arises and flows around
them, producing powerful magical effects; these people are called mages,
and the powerful abilities they perfect are called spells. Others learn
to manipulate the magical energies that they produce within themselves,
granting them supernatural physical and mental abilities; these are
*psions*, and their powers are called *sleights*. Some creatures anatomy
even incorporates the presence of magic, giving them innate magical
abilities; we say these creatures are *empowered*. Sometimes, these
energies form into beings made completely of magic; we call these
Spirits (see *Spirits, *below). Some flesh-and-blood beings serve
Spirits—or broker deals with them; these are referred to as *priests*,
and any abilities or gifts the spirits grant them are called *boons*.

Magic can also be incorporated into the functions of devices, or infused
into solutions, allowing for magical tools, artifacts and potions to be
produced; the Commonwealth makes great use of simple magical devices and
potions, while extremely powerful magical artifacts are rare, highly
prized, and almost always unique.

Creatures are classified as either *natural, empowered *or *spirit*,
based on their relationship to magic; see *Characters* and *Races*.
Powers are classified as *sleights*, *spells, *or *boons* based on what
skill they rely on, from which we infer what source of magic that they
use (or as something else, like a maneuver, if they don’t use a magical
source); see *Powers*.

## <span id="anchor-24"></span>Spirits

Spirits are real and present things in the world of the Commonwealth—to
the point that you can walk directly up to them and speak to them,
although doing so can be difficult and dangerous.

Sometimes, magic forms into creatures, whether by binding to inert
matter to bring it to life, or by forming into creatures made entirely
of magical energy alone. Some such organisms are simple, analogous to
animals, while others are sophisticated, having minds equal to
flesh-and-blood beings. Some are even greater beings; immense, powerful
and mysterious, these are known as ~~Patrons~~ Great Spirits.

Spirit creatures are fueled by the energies they siphon from a
particular region or process, called their Basin. Sometimes, a Basin is
a place, like a lake or forest; sometimes, it is a large region, like
the World-Spine mountains. Sometimes it is a set of places holy to them,
which might be as broadly-construed as “all forges” or as specific as
“the spot where Lyn was slain.” Other times, Basins are processes:
such as music, for example, or decay, or fire. In turn, many spirits
also have the ability to influence their Basin, granting them
supernatural abilities.

Spirit creatures are populous, almost as much so as natural creatures.
Spirit creatures frequently align themselves into clans and nations,
much like natural creatures do—with the additional complication
introduced by being bound to specific basins, which can make some
alliances tense and some conflicts inevitable.

Some Spirits are mercurial, hiding behind religions and refusing to
interact directly with flesh-and-blood beings; others, however, are very
direct, presenting themselves directly to mortals and dealing plainly
with them. (And, of course, a great many spirits have no concern for
mortal affairs at all, dealing only with other spirits.)

## <span id="anchor-25"></span>Propitiation

Some spirits can be *propitiated*—that is, they will do favors for
mortals that perform certain rituals or make certain offerings; we call
these spirits Patrons. As in all other things, the wants of Patrons vary
widely; some will grant simple favors in exchange for offerings of food
or song, others might demand elaborate ritual, while still others might
command much higher prices—life, treasure or blood. (Note that only some
Spirits can be propitiated; others have no particular concern for the
affairs of Natural beings—or simply don’t have any useful ability to
offer.) (Making a deal with a spirit that cannot be Bound can be
dangerous; see *Binds*, below.)

To some extent, priests in Renaisance work much like brokers: they
decipher the intricate and complex details of the wants, natures and
politics of nearby Spirits, and connect flesh-and-blood supplicants to
Spirits with whom they can do business.

## <span id="anchor-26"></span>Manifestations

  - many spirits dwell in or near their basin (esp. if it's a region)
    
      - that is, in the physical world, and not in some other “realm”
      - may not physically manifest, however; they are diffuse in the
        basin
      - may have specific form they can take

  - some spirits have holy places where they can appear

  - some spirits are connected to physical forms, and can travel about
    much like a natural creature (see f.ex. Shamblers and Tempters)

  - the dead are an exception. Dead creatures pass into a realm of
    Shade. Some specific spirits also exist in the realm of Shade
    normally.

## <span id="anchor-27"></span>Saints

Some mortals can form special relationships with existing spirits; these
mortals are sometimes granted places as Spirits after death (as opposed
to passing into the Realm of the Dead). In principle, the
formerly-mortal Spirit then works like any other Spirit, and can act as
a free agent; Saint refers specifically to those spirits that remain
loyal to some other Spirit's cause. In practice, most Spirits do not
“sanctify” a mortal recklessly, and so most Saints remain loyal to
their Spirit's cause.

Saints frequently do not have happy histories.

## <span id="anchor-28"></span>Binds

Binds are a major part of bargaining with the Spirits. They are also
almost a complete mystery.

A *bind* is a ritual that exerts control over a spirit; theoretically, a
bound spirit can be compelled to act in a certain way, such as
performing a service (or not doing something).

Only some Spirits have (known) binds, and any two spirits are likely to
have entirely different binds.

Binds are terribly understood. There is no known way to tell if a spirit
is bound – or learn what its bind is, or tell if it even has one. Only a
few spirits have known Binds at all – some skeptics even maintain that
binds do not exist – that they are simply acts put forth to lull mortals
into trusting Spirits.

Binds can vary widely. Some require a spirit to consent to being bound
in order to be effective, while others do not. Some are simple, like
speaking a short phrase in a spirit's presence, while others are quite
complex, involving elaborate ceremonies or complex rituals. Likewise,
their effects and durations can vary wildly – from compelling a spirit
to keep vigil until relieved, to preventing a spirit from lying until
the dawn, to binding a spirit to serve until released, to preventing a
spirit from touching anything orange for a week. Making things even more
complex, binds can have bizarre failure-cases and exceptions—a bind
might not work if the candles used in the ritual are made from the fat
of a mother goat and its foal, for example, or a bind might break if a
given spirit crosses running water.

Needless to say, keeping track of which spirits have known binds, how
those binds work and, importantly, if those binds have any “gotchas” is
a major and valuable occupation for the Clergy\!

## <span id="anchor-29"></span>Sample Spirits and Temples

  - Uncle Haw
    
      - Great Spirit whose basin is whole Haw River
      - Haw River flows East from World Spine to Gulf. Wide, deep, slow.
      - Does not present to Mortals directly, but
      - affable and good-natured.
      - Sometimes appears as a catfish, river otter, river rat or
        terrapin.
      - Will repay kindness to anyone who feeds him

  - The Orator
    
      - Great Spirit whose basin is (are?) the achievements of mortals
      - deals with mortals openly.
      - Will not grant boons to mortals at all
      - glories in un-aided mortal achievements; libraries, theaters,
        museums, schools are his holy sites
      - currently serving as Distinguished Professor of Rhetoric in
        Commonwealth capitol

  - The Mother
    
      - Great Spirit associated with hearth-fires, bonfires and forges;
        her Basin is thriving and nurturing communities.
      - deals with mortals openly
      - walks throughout Commonwealth, visiting small towns
      - encourages peaceful co-existence and the building of communities
      - Also known as the Guard: worshiped by an order of Paladins
      - Propitiated by caring for the sick, by providing for the poor,
        by welcoming aliens into a community

  - Lyn, Daughter of Rys
    
      - Great Spirit and Saint, her Basin is courage and sacrifice
      - Gnoll farmer on Islandholm when Shade Elves attacked.
      - Taken hostage and tortured.
      - Freed during counter-attack, went to front lines; attacked and
        killed Shade Elf general, was killed by his body-guard. Had no
        weapons; jumped him and bit his throat.
      - Was Elevated by the Mother
      - Patron of Sacrifice, worshiped by an order of Paladins
      - manifests as she died: female Gnoll in tattered clothing,
        covered in deep cuts and wounds
      - appears in company of Orator and All-Mother

  - The Mourner
    
      - Great Spirit and Saint whose Basins are history, law, justice
        and mercy.
      - Black dragon who dwelt among nomadic elf-like race
      - elf-like race was massacred more than a 1500 years ago, when
        pre-settled humans entered region
      - elevated upon death (details not widely known, *possible
        adventure arc*)
      - Patron associated with History, Law, Justice and Mercy.
      - Rarely manifests: appears as massive black dragon when he does
      - Dwells among the ancient swamps (on the South-Estern edge of the
        World Spine mountains), where his adopted people lived.

  - The Eyrie
    
      - spirits whose basins exist in peaks in northern World-Spine
        Mountains
      - spirits of wind, rock, cloud, birds and ice
      - area is mostly pristine, save single temple on one peek, path
        and bridges to it
      - group has appointed a handful of specific spirits as “Speakers”,
        only these manifest and speak to mortals
      - arrangements made with mortals (and acceptable propitiations)
        vary widely
      - have permanent clergy, who frequently hope to fly among the
        spirits in the clouds after death

  - The One that Chose Us
    
      - Great Spirit and patron; it is a tribal spirit, who chooses its
        favored people, and they become its Basin.
      - It can grant them strength, but it demands their devotion—and
        that they maintain their place as its chosen.
      - It usually selects the strongest people, by some definition—at
        least among those who seek its favor. Sometimes it will shift
        its favor if a people becomes too weak.
      - Sometimes no obvious reason why its favor shifts.
      - Temples and worship sites center a gold or bronze statue,
        representing an ideal, heroic vision of the people in question.

  - Bones of Deep Rock
    
      - Great Spirit
      - largely unknown to flesh-and-blood creatures and humble spirits
        alike, dwells deep beneath the northern edge of the World-Spine
        Mountains; they are his Basin.
      - Pays no heed to mortals; goes about his own business, for his
        own reasons. Is uninterested in mortal affairs, and cannot be
        propitiated.
      - When his affairs intersect with those of mortals, the results
        are mystifying, without rhyme or reason, or apparent
        motivation—and, because he is a strong spirit with a vast
        basin, the consequences for mortals are often profound.

  - The Cypress
    
      - Great Spirit dwelling in the swamps and marshes in the
        south-western lowlands, which are his Basin.
      - He likes mortals, and is happy to share his land with them.
      - A complex spirit: as a Spirit associated with nature, he demands
        that his lands be preserved; however, as a social creature, he
        enjoys interacting with mortal beings.
      - He believes that it’s possible for society to expand without
        destroying nature, and seeks to preserve such a balance.
      - Father of the Shamblers, see below.

## <span id="anchor-30"></span>Death

Most who die pass on into the Realm of Shade, a dark and immaterial
place of which mortals know little. There is no known record of any of
the living entering or viewing it; while the spirits of the dead can be
coaxed back from it, they are frequently uncooperative. When the dead
manifest in the material world, they are frequently changed from their
former selves: they are beyond all mortal concern and consequence, and
are often aggressive, vulgar and destructive.

Investigation is further hampered because it is difficult to conjure the
spirits of the dead; it often requires the complicity of powerful
spirits to accomplish. In particular, summoning the spirit of a
*particular* deceased mortal can prove extraordinarily tricky, without a
close personal connection to the departed or the aid of a power Spirit;
those who attempt to summon the dead without one or both run the risk of
calling forth some unrelated deceased, whose only concern might be to
cause as much chaos as they can.

Some mortals have never been successfully summoned, despite repeated
attempts made by expert Clerics; it is assumed—or perhaps hoped—that
some happier fate than departure to the realm of Shade has claimed these
beings, and that they simply do not wish to
return.

