---
title: "Character Creation and Advancement"
---

## <span id="anchor-86"></span>Character Creation

Proceed through the following steps in order:

  - For Free:
    
      - 3 dots in your native language (pick an appropriate one)
      - 1 dot in Commonwealth Standard
      - 1 Luck
      - up to 2 Milestones

  - Pick your race, which will include:
    
      - Aptitude Bonuses
      - Health (DUR), Strength (STR) and Size
      - senses and movement
      - other special properties

  - Choose your Aptitudes
    
      - Each of your aptitudes begins with a rating of 15.
    
      - Add your racial Aptitude modifiers.
    
      - Distribute 20 points between your various aptitudes.
        
          - You could add 5 to SOM, 10 to WIL and 5 to COO, for example.
    
      - Distrubte -5 points between your various aptitudes.
        
          - You could subtract 5 from your COO, for example.
          - You can subtract points from one of the aptitudes that you
            added points to.

  - Pick your Background
    
      - The bonuses granted by your Background “apply” now. In
        particular, that means that, if your background grants you skill
        ranks, then those are your first ranks in that skill—you will
        have them before you start spending CP.
      - Skill Ranks granted by your background work exactly like ranks
        that you paid for.
      - So, if your background gives you 10 ranks in Barter, you can buy
        20 more ranks for 20 CP (1 a piece), and then 20 more ranks for
        40 CP (2 CP a piece), and be at the maximum of 50 ranks during
        Character Creation.

  - 800 Creation Points
    
      - Pick a wealth level; see the table.
    
      - Skill Points
        
          - 1 CP → 1 point in a skill (30 or fewer skill points
            purchased)
          - 2 CP → 1 skill point (31<sup>st</sup> skill point and
            there-after)
          - Proficiency Skills: you get some proficiencies for free as
            you purchase ranks. You get your first proficiency when you
            purchase your 10<sup>th</sup> rank, and another proficiency
            every 20 ranks thereafter. (So, at your 50<sup>th</sup>
            rank, you’ll get your third free proficiency, for example.)
          - 5 CP → an additional proficiency
    
      - 5 CP → A specialization
        
          - you must have 10 ranks in a skill to purchase a
            specialization for it, see *Skills*
    
      - 10 CP → a trait
    
      - 10 CP → a class
    
      - 10 CP → a power
    
      - 15 CP → +1 Luck
    
      - Items:
        
          - 1 CP → minor-cost item
          - 5 CP → moderate-cost item
          - 10 CP → high-cost item
          - 20 CP → extreme-cost item
          - We don’t track the CP cost of Trivial-cost items; most
            useful trivial-cost items are best acquired as parts of
            skill kits.
          - see *Items*
    
      - 5 CP → a dot in a language

  - Motivations
    
      - pick your motivations now (see *Motivations*)

  - Character Creation Limits
    
      - no more than 50 ranks in a skill
      - no aptitudes higher than 35 or lower than 5
      - at least 150 CP spent on skills with the *combat *tag
      - at least 200 CP spent on skills that don't have the *combat *tag

Wealth Levels:

|                    |      |
| ------------------ | ---- |
| 0 (no possessions) | \-10 |
| 1 (peasant)        | \-5  |
| 2 (local artisan)  | 0    |
| 3 (merchant)       | 5    |
| 4 (local wealthy)  | 10   |
| 5 (noble)          | 20   |

## <span id="anchor-87"></span>Character Advancement

As characters operate in the world (and especially as they complete
adventures), they will gain Rez Points (RP); RP rewards are the primary
method by which characters advance, and are the primary reward for most
adventures. Characters can spend rez to advance during down-time, using
the same rules by which they spent CP during character creation. When
spending rez, the character-creation limits no longer apply, although
the global limits still do.

We don't have rules for training requirements, but gaining new skills
should generally make sense. Skills and classes can be justified either
by events during the adventure, or effort undertaken during down-time.
You usually cannot gain new Backgrounds, and there are some Traits that
you cannot buy with Rez (at the GM’s discretion).

See also the “Buying Off Negative Traits” optional rule.

## <span id="anchor-88"></span>Rewarding Players

As a GM, how should you reward your players, and when should you give
them their rewards?

To take the last question first, we find that long-running games are
usually broken into self-contained adventures, most of which take 6
sessions, give-or-take. Loosely, we call these “chapters”. Chapters are
usually separated by a few months of down-time, where characters can
travel, spend rewards, and live their normal lives. The end of a chapter
is usually the right time to hand out player rewards (of which Rez is
often the most important).

How many rewards should you give? Unlike some other games, this has some
dependence on the player, and generally varies based on how each player
did. We often give out a (relatively large) *base reward* that is the
same for the entire party, and then smaller *per-character rewards*
based on how the game went.

In *Renaissance*, Rez is likely to be the most important reward that
your players receive—a situation that might be very different from some
other games you have played. We typically give a base reward of 2 Rez
per session (so, if a chapter took 7 sessions, everyone would get 14 Rez
at the end). The party may receive a rez bonus or penalty, based on
whether they far exceeded their goal (+3), or fell well short of it
(-3). (Even in the case of catastrophic failure, the party should get
*some* rez.)

We usually find that it’s a good idea to give all members of the party
the same base rez, even if a character dies and is replaced, or a new
player joines; this eases bookkeeping, and it helps keep the party on
roughly the same level of power.

Individual characters can earn *bonus* rez under certain circumstances,
and can suffer a rez penalty under others; consult the following list
for examples.

  - Character achieved a major success pertaining to one of their
    motivational goals: +2 Rez
  - Character suffered a major failure pertaining to one of their
    motivational goals: -2 Rez
  - Strong technical play: +1 Rez per instance.
  - Good role-play: +1 Rez per instance.
  - Help and Support: +1 to +5 Rez. (No wise GM is above bribing their
    players to help with book-keeping, drawing maps or hosting.)

Traits and Milestones are another common source of reward (or
punishment, in the case of a negative trait). (Not everything that earns
you bonus rez earns you a trait or milestone, but most of the things
that earn you a trait or milestone also earn you a rez bonus—or
penalty\!)

Of course, players may also receive wealth, fame, titles, magical items
and the like. These kinds of rewards can be a little tricky, because of
*Renaissance’s* abstracted wealth system—while you *can* give your
players 500 Gold per, it integrates poorly with the game’s other
systems. We suggest awarding players with other assets—like an
*investment* (see *Wealth and Income*) or property (as a *major item*,
see *Gear*). The granting of a title can also be represented by awarding
a character a *class*. Players can also be rewarded with the services of
local artisans, to craft whatever the players want; this both makes
sense, as a reward that even a poor manor might be able to provide, and
it gives players a fair degree of freedom in what form their reward
finally takes.

Magic items make particularly *bad* rewards in *Renaissance—*which might
require some adjustment for people coming from other game systems. In
*Renaissance*, gear is a *small* part of what defines a character, and
in particular gear is not designed to advance in power or straddle very
disparate power-levels. This means that there is no analog to the trusty
*+2-better enchanted weapon* of D\&D and friends. This problem is
exacerbated because *Renaissance* quite deliberately provides very
little guidance on what can and cannot be a magical item, instead
preferring to leave it up to individual player’s preference and
creativity to decide what kind of magical items they might want and then
design it themselves (with your help, of course). Similarly, we provide
no guidance (and in particular, no limits) to the kinds of things that
players can make with their own skills, resources and time. Taken
together, this means that there should be *no* magical item that a
player character could reasonably have, but could not have acquired
during character creation (or made during down-time) if they wanted it.

This *doesn’t* mean that you can never give your players neat magical
items as rewards, especially if they express a desire for some; but it
does mean that you *should not* rely on advancement in magical equipment
as a mechanism for character advancement. Don’t think you have to give
players magical items, and don’t think that your players have to get
magical items from you\!

Conversely, one very thematic reward that Renaissance offers is a *boon*
from the spirits. Remember that, while many spirits are aloof and
mysterious, *some* spirits cooperate happily with mortals. If a hero
where to perform some service for a temple or shrine to Uncle Haw—or to
a people who live by the river, that he cherishes—they might earn the
great spirit’s favor, which could be a powerful benefit indeed.

## <span id="anchor-89"></span>NPCs and Followers

NPCs and Followers use slightly different rules. As opposed to Player
Characters (those characters that are controlled by the Players),
Non-Player Characters are controlled by the GM and used to populate the
world. Most NPCs will not have complete statistics; instead, they will
only have stats appropriate to their role, such as a shop-keeper only
having a Barter skill, a Protocol skill and a certain number of Trade
Goods. “Major NPCs” are those that are prominent in a campaign—a
friendly noble who gives the players their mission, for example, or the
arch-villain of the campaign. Finally, Followers are “friendly”
characters associated with a player, such as an assistant or helper. It
is generally advised that players be allowed to control their Followers,
although the GM may prevent a Player from having a Follower do something
completely unreasonable (like mortally wounding themselves, or giving
the Player Character all their material wealth.)

The GM does not need to follow the character-creation rules to build
NPCs; abilities and skills can be freely assigned appropriate to the
NPC’s role. The following restrictions apply to NPCs and followers:

  - Major NPCs receive 1 Luck for free like PCs, but cannot purchase
    additional Luck.
  - Minor NPCs do not receive Luck, cannot purchase Luck, and start with
    only 10 in each Aptitude.
  - Followers do not receive Luck, cannot purchase Luck, and receive a
    lower number of Creation Points. The feature that is granting a
    Follower will specify how many Creation Points they receive, and
    might specify other limits as well.

