---
title: "Races"
---

There are three separate keywords that have special significance in Race
entries. All races will have one of the following keywords: Natural,
Supernatural or Spirit. This tells you whether the race is
flesh-and-blood (Natural), has some inborn supernatural quality
(Supernatural), or is composed entirely of magical energy (Spirit).

Some races have optional Traits, Classes, Powers or Backgrounds. You
don’t acquire them for free; rather, they are added to your list of
options at character creation, and you may *optionally* select them
using all the normal rules for taking Traits, Classes, Powers or
Backgrounds during character creation. (So, for example, Shifters don't
*just have* the Animal Form trait, but they can purchase it during
character creation for CP, just like any other trait they are eligible
for.)

Game Design Note: narrowing the stuff you get in Races down to *only*
what every member of that species would have, regardless of background.
Moving other features (c.f. skill bonuses) to backgrounds. Adding
Optional Backgrounds to races that have unique sub-cultures (like Ash
Elves, Herders or Dwarves).

Game Design Note: races selection should be interesting, and should
affect how you play the character. However, you shouldn’t have to pick a
specific race to get a specific feature or be good at a specific job.
This is why many abilities were moved to Backgrounds, and why many
abilities are being replaced by Traits-for-free (so that any other Race
can just take the Trait if they want to).

## Common Races

### Drakes

  - Though it was long known that the Drakes where a created people, it
    was only a few hundred years ago, as power devolved to the people in
    the Dragonshire and as their alliance with the Commonwealth drew
    closer, that their true origin was revealed.

  - More than a century before the Old Charter, after Karrach claimed a
    swath of the Empire of Man, it had become apparent to him that he
    could not govern such a large territory on his own.
    
      - He had called other dragons to him, to share the rule of his
        kingdom as his lords and vassals, but dragons, though long-lived
        and mighty, where also few, and had little shared culture or
        history before his kingdom. Karrach need a *people*.

  - Karrach, aided by the dragons who answered his call, began a search
    for a powerful spirit willing to provide him a great boon—for a
    great price.
    
      - Ultimately, a spirit contacted him; it variably identified itself as *the Bulrush God*, *the Rainstorm Shepherd* and *the Osprey’s Father*, and it dwelt within the southern reaches of the Dragonshire.
      - The spirit’s actual basin remains unknown, as does the extent of
        its powers; they are certainly great, given what it did.
      - It gave Karrach and his followers instructions for creating holy
        sites—only the precious first few of which it has actually
        blessed—and a ritual they could perform there. The ritual would
        convert a dragon’s egg into a drake’s egg—drakes being creatures
        of dragon’s blood and kind, but smaller, less mighty and far
        more fertile.
      - The price the Bulrush God demanded was perhaps surprisingly
        cheap for what it did: it demanded ownership of a stretch of
        lowland marsh on the southern coast of the Dragonshire, fully 20
        kilometers along the coast and extending 7 kilometers inland,
        and a lordly title.
      - This represented an enormous risk for Karrach, as he knew of no
        way to bind the spirit, which was unknown to him.

  - The Bulrush God is still worshiped in the Dragonshire.
    
      - The Bulrush God is enigmatic; very little is known about it,
        neither its actual basin nor the true extent of its powers nor
        its ultimate goals.
      - The Bulrush God answers very few supplicants; it is not known
        what draws it. No bind for it is known—unsurprisingly, for a
        spirit of its power.
      - Conversely, the Bulrush God interferes little in the affairs of
        mortals and lesser spirits. Particularly, it has never used its
        lordly title, and it has not allowed settlement of the land it
        claims, and so has no subjects. (Neither has it forbidden the
        land to hunters or travelers, leading many to wonder what its
        actual intent with it was.)

  - Drakes frequently trace their lineages back to their Dragon
    forebears.
    
      - Each egg needed to be live; thus, all Drakes have at least two
        dragon ancestors, one male and one female.
      - The ritual to transform an egg required a price of each
        participant dragon; it was not undertaken lightly.
      - Though Drakes can nominally be broken into clans based on their
        lineage, their familiy trees where often rendered *complex* by
        feudal politics; for some, their clan and heritage are important
        parts of who they are; other drakes care little—or may not even
        know their ancestry at all.
      - Many Drake clans (or smaller noble families) claim noble titles
        and land-holdings—at least in principle.

  - In the early days of the Dragonshire, when they were a feudal
    territory (and most of the feudal lords were dragons), Drakes tended
    to take positions of authority, above Humans but below Dragons.

  - As political reforms took place, the role of Drakes, Dragons and
    Human leaders changed. The modern Dragonshire is a Commonwealth
    province, and power has been devolved from the hereditary nobility
    (of Drakes and Dragons) to civil Councils.

  - Still, Drakes largely think of themselves as being of “noble blood”,
    and many of them still hold hereditary titles – which may or may not
    be of practical significance.

  - Even though power in the Dragonshire has been devolved to civil
    councils, having the right lineage still helps: Drakes commonly hold
    positions of privilege and authority in the Dragonshire.

  - Because their culture is similar to that of the feudal Kingdoms of
    Man, Drakes find it fairly easy to interact politically with that
    neighboring state.

  - Drakes commonly serve in units of the Commonwealth Military that
    draw from the citizenry of the Dragonshire

  - Somewhat like Gnolls, Drakes also commonly take up jobs where their
    immense strength is an asset. However, because Drakes are much more
    comfortable in large cities, this tends to mean “blacksmithing” more
    often than it means “farm work”.

  - Drakes tend to be good-natured and sociable at best, but also brash,
    proud and stubborn at worst.

  - Appearance: Drakes are humanoid in gross layout, but they have the
    head, long tail, powerful limbs, tough scales and sharp claws of
    Dragons. {It may be better to say they look like Dragons, except for
    being roughly humanoid in shape and size.)

  - Vitals:
    
      - Old Age: 100 Years
      - Average Height: 2.4m
      - Average Weight: 110kg

  - DUR 40, STR 40
  - \+5 SAV, +5 SOM, +10 WIL
  - Movement: Foot 4 / 12
  - Senses: Normal, Low-Light
  - Tags: Natural, Humanoid, Dragon-Kin, Drake
  - Language Group: DDK, HHED
  - Scales: +2 Armor

  - Optional Trait: Chroma
    
      - Though Drakes come in vibrant colors and hues, most have no
        inherited the particular magical natures of Dragons; you,
        however, have.
      - You gain resistance to one of the following: Chemical, Cold,
        Disease, Electricity or Fire.

  - Optional Trait: Dragon’s Flight
    
      - Dragons have a wide variety of modes of motion, and you have
        inherited one of them.
      - You gain one of the following movement modes: Swim 3 / 15,
        Burrow 2 / 6, Fly 3 / 15 / 45

  - Optional Power: Breath Weapon
    
      - You have inherited the ability to breathe fire—or some other
        dangerous substance.
    
      - This power has a Type. If you took the Chroma trait, then its
        type is the one you chose for your resistance; otherwise, the
        type is Fire.
    
      - You gain one of the following effects, depending on the power’s
        type:
        
          - Chemical: you can spit a toxic spray. You gain the following
            attack: Indicate-Only Attack, Splash 1D10 ÷ 3 m. Range 10m
            short / 20m long. Tags: Natural, Chemical. Covered opponents
            suffer 1D10 ÷ 2 DV a turn; the chemical can be washed off
            with water (a standard action requiring a source of water).
          - Cold: you can hurl an icy spear. You gain the following
            attack: Indicate-Only Attack, 1D10+2+DB DV, AP -4. Tags:
            Natural, Cold, Ice
          - Disease: You can launch a small bundle of bone-like spines
            infected with a deadly plague. You gain the following
            attack: Indicate-Only Attack, 1D10 ÷ 2 DV, AP -3; Tags:
            Natural, Disease. If you deal DV, then your target is
            exposed to the disease. Build disease rules and come back.
          - Electricity: you can deliver powerful electric shocks. Your
            unarmed attacks (and natural weapons, should you have any)
            deal an additional 1D10 damage and gain the Electric tag.
          - Fire: you can breath fire. You gain the following attack:
            Indicate-Only Attack, 1D10+DB DV, AP -, Blast. Tags:
            Natural, Fire.

  - Optional Background: Dragonshire Noble
    
      - You hail from a noble bloodline in the Dragonshire. Though
        actual rule now rests in the hands of the House of Commons,
        having the right ancestors is still *useful*.
      - 10 ranks in Protocol
      - 10 ranks on one other Social skill
      - 10 ranks in one Combat skill
      - Either the Noble Class or the Officer Class. If you select the
        Officer Class, you must later purchase the Soldier class during
        character creation, to meet its prerequisites.

### Elves

  - Elves are a common people throughout the Emerald Plains.

  - Elves are humanoid in gross layout, although they have finer
    features (including long, pointed ears).
    
      - Elves have excellent hearing and vision.
      - Notably, elves are descended from arboreal creatures, and retain
        prehensile feet. These are larger than human feet, owing to
        being reinforced with extra tendons, bones and musculature;
        thanks to this reinforcement, Elves can run on open ground as
        well as humans.
      - Elves also have exotic skin pigmentations, which help them to
        blend in to natural environments.

  - There are three major Elven ethnic groups: Wood Elves, Shade Elves
    and Ash Elves.

  - Wood Elves are a tribal culture, dispersed throughout the
    northwestern portion of the Emerald Plane.
    
      - Wood Elves do not have a large, overarching nation; their tribes
        are usually more similar to nearby tribes of other races than to
        distant Wood Elves.
      - The Commonwealth’s interactions with wood elves have, for the
        most part, been peaceful; by the present day, the majority of
        the wood elf tribes have signed the Commonwealth Charter (and
        now the Commonwealth Compact).
      - However, most wood elf communities continue to practice
        traditional, tribal ways of life; they live within the vast
        interior swaths of the Emerald Plane, having little contact with
        outsiders, even though they are technically Commonwealth
        citizens.
      - Because of this, wood elves are rarely seen outside of their
        tribal communities.
      - Wood Elves typically live in small settlements, with a few
        planted fields around them. The able-bodied typically herd or
        hunt, while the very young, the very old and the infirm live in
        their settlements.
      - Wood Elves have a complex skin pattern, a little like an ocelot.
        Their bellies, underarms and inner thighs are a dull white,
        while their backs, arms and legs are a dark green. Running
        through this is a complex pattern of black spots and folding and
        curving lines. Their hair is often dark green or black; rarely,
        it is gold or orange.

  - Shade Elves are plains raiders hailing from the open plains on the
    southwest of the Emerald Plane.
    
      - Before the arrival of the Commonwealth, they preyed on the
        peoples and cultures near them, forcing some to pay tribute and
        raiding the others without mercy.
      - As the Commonwealth spread West and entered the Shade Elves’
        territory, some of the tribes they had preyed upon allied with
        those Commonwealth settlers.
      - The Commonwealth built a string of walled cities and fortified
        keeps on the path to the sea; after a disastrous siege led to a
        losing war, the Shade Elves’ territory was severely restricted.
      - This left the Shade Elves vulnerable to the Leapers, a
        subterranean race that overwhelmed their largest settlements and
        forced the Shade Elves to pay them tribute.
      - The Leapers later forced the Shade Elves to cooperate with their
        other tributaries, the Ratfolk of the Warren Isles; the
        resulting union came to be called the Shaded Sea Peoples, named
        for the sea that separated the Warren Isles from the Shade
        Elves’ territory on the southwest of the continent.
      - Shade Elves are still raiders, striking at settlements on the
        edge of the Commonwealth and on the northwest of the Raptor’s
        Plane.
      - They also participate in piracy, carried by Ratfolk ships and
        sailors.
      - As members of the Shaded Sea Peoples, they are one of the
        Emerald Plane’s great powers, and an enemy of the Commonwealth.
        They have been in conflict with the Commonwealth off-and-on for
        centuries.
      - Shade Elves live in small settlements dug into the bases of
        hills and the sides of mesas and river-valleys. Their
        settlements are usually fortified and walled, both to help
        fending of rebellions by their tributaries and predation at the
        hands of other Shade Elf clans.
      - Shade Elven skin is striped, a little like a tiger or zebra. The
        stripes alternate between a dark black and a dull grey. Shade
        Elven hair is similarly black and grey.

  - Ash Elves are urban, thoughtful and philosophical people; they are
    the descendants of Shade and Ash Elves who settled in the Haven
    Isles.
    
      - Many trace the origins of the Ash Elves to the siege of
        Islandholme by the Shade Elves in CY 447 and its aftermath, as
        Shade Elves taken hostage in the siege where slowly ingtegrated
        into the Commonwealth and interbred with Wood Elves.
      - Ash Elven settlements have also absorbed many refugees from the
        tumult and cruelty of Shade Elven culture, and have served as a
        familiar home for Wood Elves wishing to join a more urban
        culture.
      - Ash Elven culture was formed in the cities of the Haven Isles,
        influenced by the countless other traditions brought there by
        settlers from the rest of the Commonwealth.
      - Ash Elves are a very thoughtful people, and they are avid
        consumers of literature, art, law, philosophy, and other forms
        of scholarship. They also tend to be highly eclectic in the
        scholarship they consume, drawing for the intellectual
        traditions of races and cultures throughout the commonwealth.
      - Ash Elven culture is disciplined, mindful and meditative; they
        are often reserved, stoic in the face of danger, but vibrant and
        joyous in time of celebration.
      - Ash Elves tend to prefer urban environs, and can be found
        throughout the Commonwealth’s large cities.
      - Ash Elves have also built cities of their own; they tend to
        build large underground settlements, somewhat like those
        constructed by Dwarves and Kobolds.
      - Ash Elven culture is open, egalitarian and libertine; guests are
        welcome and well-treated, and they tend to get along well with
        their neighbors—especially dwarves and kobolds.
      - They are particularly known for the joyous celebrations that
        mark their holidays, in which their cities are brightly
        decorated and travelers and neighbors are welcome.
      - Ash Elves tend to be strong advocates for the Commonwealth’s
        continued peaceful expansion.
      - Ash Elven skin is mostly the color of ash, as the name implies;
        they have a few stripes along their backs, the tops of their
        arms, and the outside of their legs. The stripes are thing, and
        alternate between white and black. Their hair is often black,
        ash grey, pale white or ember orange.

  - DUR 25, STR 25

  - \+5 COO +5 WIL +10 INT

  - Movement: Foot 5 / 15

  - Senses: Normal, Low-Light

  - Tags: Natural, Humanoid, Elf

  - Language Group: HHED

  - *Keen Senses*: Elves receive +20 to visual Perception checks, and
    +10 to auditory perception checks.

  - Prehensile Feet: Elves have prehensile feet; this allows them to
    grip and manipulate objects with their feet as adroitly as they do
    with their hands. This is of particular use while climbing and
    grappling, applying a +20 bonus to those tests.
    
      - Elves treat their feet as non-dominant limbs, so they need to
        purchase the Ambidextrous trait at least once to wield weapons
        with them without taking a penalty.

  - Natural Camouflage: Elves have complex skin patterns, which serve as
    camouflage. These patterns provide a +10 benefit to Stealth checks;
    this benefit is lost if their skin is covered, and is not cumulative
    with worn camouflage.

Optional Background: Ash Elven Undercity

  - You hail from one of the Ash-Elven undercities beneath the low peaks of the Haven Isles.
  - 10 ranks in Control skill
  - 10 ranks in one Art skill
  - 10 ranks in one Technical skill
  - the Resilient trait

Optional Background: Shade Elf Raider

  - You grew up among the most feared mounted raiders that the Emerald Plains has ever seen.
  - 10 ranks in one Combat skill
  - 10 ranks in Ride
  - 10 ranks in Survival
  - one weapon (of Cost: Medium)
  - one Survival skill kit.
  - the Hardened (witnessing and performing cruelty) neutral trait.
  - Special: Shade Elves don't receive one dot in Common the way that most charactesr do.  Instead, they receive one dot in Shaded Sea Common.  They commonly speak Shade-Elven (Language Group HHED).

Optional Background: Wood Elf Tribal Commuity

  - You are from one of the ancient, pre-urban Elven cultures living to the west of the Worldspine.
  - 10 ranks in Fray
  - 10 ranks in Ranged Weapons
  - 10 ranks in Stealth
  - 10 ranks in Survival

### Gnolls

  - Almost as social as humans and incredibly strong, Gnollish strength
    (and endurance) was the backbone of the early Commonwealth.

  - Gnolls are very common in small farming communities everywhere, and
    in the mid-sized manors throughout Heartland Province.

  - Gnolls make up more than half of the Commonwealth Military, where
    their strength is invaluable.

  - A small number of Gnollish tribal communities still exist.

  - Gnolls display less sex dimorphism than some other races do; because
    of this, Gnollish females have long served in military and
    leadership rolls.

  - Gnolls “cultural memory” still very much includes the legend of
    fleeing persecution from other savage Gnolls and settling beside
    humans; to this day, Gnolls are immensely proud of their roll in
    founding the Commonwealth, and the roll they continue to play in its
    prosperity and safety.

  - Gnolls put quite a lot of effort into getting along with members of
    other communities, and will go out of their way to make other races
    feel comfortable around them. Many Gnollish communities have two
    separate set of customs, one for “when other races are around,” and
    one for when they're not. They are not secretive about this; they do
    this because, for example, they are evolved from carrion-eaters and
    most other races don't want to see Gnoll “cooking.”

  - Gnolls are aware of how savage they look, and many put quite a lot
    of effort into developing elaborate, refined personal styles to
    counter this effect.

  - Gnolls are roughly humanoid, save their great size—and that they
    have the head and feat of a hyena, and are covered in dusky or ochre
    fur.

  - Vitals
    
      - Old Age: 50 Years
      - Average Height: 2.2m
      - Average Weight: 80kg

  - One of three Founding Races. Strong and tough, Gnolls are a majority
    of the military and are common on farming manors.
  - DUR 35, STR 35
  - \+5 INT, +5 SAV, +10 SOM
  - Movement: Foot 5 / 15
  - Senses: Normal, Low-Light, Scent
  - Tags: Natural, Humanoid, Gnoll
  - Language Group: GR
  - *Hide*: +1 Armor
  - *Scavenger*: Resistance to food-borne illness (+20 on related
    checks)
  - *Sturdy*: Gnolls can Negate one Wound

  - Optional Background: Military Family
    
      - You hail from one of the many Gnollish military families.
      - 10 ranks in Fray
      - 10 ranks in two other Combat skills
      - the Soldier class

  - Optional Background: Caravan Guard
    
      - Continuing a way of life that stretches back more than 700 years, you travel with Halfling trade-caravans, serving as a guard, a bouncer, a hand and a diplomat.
      - 10 ranks in Intimidate
      - 10 ranks in Perception
      - 10 ranks in Persuasion
      - 10 ranks in Survival

### Humans

  - Social, dextrous and intelligent, Humans where the first race to
    build cities, and the first to build great nations.
    
  - Humans are also known for the great endurance; while many other
    races' energy ebbs and flows, humans can maintain a steady walking
    pace over great distances.  They are also fare more resistant to
    shock than many other races are.

  - Even today, Humans are widely renowned for their manual dexterity,
    for their society-building social instincts and their
    problem-solving abilities.

  - One of the three founding races (besides Gnolls and Halflings),
    Humans are widely regarded as the “social problem-solvers” who
    helped bind together all the widely different communities that came
    together to form the early Commonwealth.

  - Humans are frequently academics, professionals, scholars, lawyers
    and politicians.

  - Humans are common in the small towns of Heartland and Dragonshire,
    and are common in cities everywhere. And, of course, are the
    principle race of the Kingdoms of Man.

  - Vitals
    
      - Old Age: 60 years
      - Average Height: 1.7m
      - Average Weight: 60kg

  - One of the three Founding Races. Intelligent, dextrous and social,
    humans are the engineers of the Commonwealth – building everything
    from wagons to societies.

  - DUR 30, STR 30

  - \+5 COG, +5 COO, +10 SAV

  - Movement: Foot 4 / 12

  - Senses: Normal

  - Tags: Natural, Humanoid, Human

  - Language Group: HHED

  - Social Animals:

      - Humans gain the Social Animal trait.

  - Inexhaustible:

	  - Humans gain +WIL to checks for Feats of Endurance.

### Kobolds

  - Kobolds are a relatively new addition to the Commonwealth; most
    Kobold communities trace their origins to a mass exodus from the
    Kingdom of Man roughly 200 years ago.

  - Kobolds are sociable, creative, and very quick.

  - Kobold culture is very family-oriented, and very community-oriented

  - Extended families tend to live together in large homes, and several
    families will cluster together to form a block.

  - Kobolds communities tend to have small personal spaces and large
    public spaces; Kobolds tend to take enormous pride the quality of
    their public spaces, which will commonly be excellently maintained,
    and will feature impressive monuments or natural landscapes.

  - Kobolds have a short lifespan, but they also tend to have large
    families; because of this, they have grown explosively
    
      - even though they were absorbed only recently, many of the
        largest Commonwealth city-states are underground Kobold
        metropolises.

  - They tend to live near Dwarves and Ash Elves, both of which are very
    long-lived. This can create some complex relationships: it is not
    uncommon for one Dwarf or Elf to closely befriend several
    generations of one Kobold family in succession, watching each
    generation come into adulthood, have children and pass away – an
    arrangement that can be very bittersweet for the Dwarf or Ash Elf
    involved.

  - Kobold culture strongly encourages industry, so Kobold communities
    tend to be highly productive.

  - They look like tiny, bipedal dragons. Somewhat like Drakes, their
    scales can take on a range of colors, and often metallic hues;
    however, unlike Drakes, this rarely has any effect on the Kobold in
    question.
    
      - Like Drakes and Dragons, and unlike other reptiles, Kobolds are
        warm-blooded.
      - Kobolds aren’t mammals; they don’t have mammary glands, and they
        have internal genitalia. Because of this, Kobolds can have very
        different ideas about what constitutes “appropriate attire”.

  - Vitals
    
      - Old Age: 40 Years
      - Average Height: 1m
      - Average Weight: 25kg

  - Clever, quick, industrious and sociable, Kobolds make up the
    majority of the underground cities.
  - DUR 25, STR 20
  - \+5 INT, +10 COO, +5 SAV
  - Movement: Foot 5 / 15
  - Senses: Normal, Infrared
  - Tags: Natural, Humanoid, Dragon-Kin, Kobold
  - Language Group: DDK
  - *Scales*: Kobolds have +1 Armor
  - *Small*: Kobolds are small

  - Optional Trait: Chroma
    
      - Though the blood of Dragons is thin in Kobolds, it does
        sometimes manifest itself.
      - You gain resistance to one of the following: Chemical, Cold,
        Disease, Electricity or Fire.

  - Optional Trait: Dragon’s Bite
    
      - Though you don’t possess a Dragon’s breath, you have inherited
        (some of) their natural weapons, and they can be infused with a
        Dragon’s fire—or some other elemental type.
    
      - Your Dragon’s Bite has a certain type. If you have the Chroma
        trait, then your type is the type you chose for Chroma; if you
        don’t, your type is Fire.
    
      - You gain the following attacks:
        
          - Bite: Unarmed Attack, 1D10+2+DB DV, AP -. Tags: Natural,
            Your Type.
          - Claws: Unarmed Attack, 1D10+DB DV, AP -2. Tags: Natural,
            *Your Type.*
    
      - You gain an additional effect, based on your *Type*:
        
          - Chemical: Your claws and bite are toxic. Any creature you
            hit with either attack is *covered*, and thereafter takes 2
            DV a turn. Water can wash the corrosive off (requiring a
            source of water and a Standard Action).
          - Cold: your natural attack gains -2 AP, and you can drain
            heat from anything you hold, bite into or breath on.
          - Disease: your claws, bite and saliva carry the following
            disease: Build disease rules and come back.
          - Electricity: your claws and bite deliver powerful shocks:
            anyone you strike or bite must make a DUR+WIL check or be
            stunned for 5 turns.
          - Fire: your claws or bite are incredibly hot: your attack
            does +3 DB, and you can set flammable objects on fire.

### Shifters

  - Shifters live in communities in the tribal territories; they are
    rare elsewhere.

  - Most shifter communities exist in tribal territories. Though most
    Shifter communities signed the Commonwealth Charter long ago, in
    practice, they have established few entanglements with outside
    communities.

  - Though not exactly insular, because they do not generally produce
    goods for export, they are not generally able to import goods from
    other communities, and so they tend to have little contact with
    other races.

  - Notably, Shifter communities tend to be very conservative. They are
    wary of outsiders, and are happy to live their lives much as they
    always have, and be left alone.

  - Small numbers of Shifters filter out of the tribal communities,
    seeking the exotic experiences the rest of the Commonwealth has to
    offer.

  - While there are a few Shifter manors, and some cities host notable
    Shifter populations, Shifters who leave the tribal territories often
    find themselves alone in their community, the only shifter in the
    town or village where they settle. Because of this, shifters outside
    the tribal territories tend to adopt the culture of the community
    they settle in.
    
      - Many shifters are not particularly social, so this often does
        not bother them as much as it might bother members of other
        species.

  - Shifters often find work that suits their personal inclinations,
    among the communities that they settle in; “their own inclination”
    is often affected by the tendencies of their hybrid form.

  - Appearance: In humanoid form, shifters somewhat resemble elves and
    humans. An individual shifter will often display traits appropriate
    to their hybrid form.

  - Vitals:
    
      - Old Age: 90 Years
      - Average Height: 1.8m
      - Average Weight: 50kg

  - Half elf, half human, half wild. Lycanthropes that can shift between
    humanoid and hybrid forms.

  - DUR 30, STR 30

  - \+5 COO, +5 INT, +5 SOM

  - Movement: Foot 4 / 12

  - Senses: Normal, Low-Light

  - Supernatural, Humanoid, Human, Elf, Shape-Shifter, Shifter

  - Language Group: HHED (humanoid form); GR (hybrid form)

  - *Hybrid*: You have two forms: Humanoid and Hybrid. The specific
    details of each form are fixed (that is, your Humanoid form (for
    example) looks the same every time you shift to it; you can't
    determine what your shape-shift forms look like each time you
    shift). You can shift between forms at will; changing forms is a
    Standard Action.
    
      - In Humanoid form, you have a mixture of Human and (Wood) Elvish
        features.
    
      - In Hybrid from, you are roughly humanoid, but with the features
        of an animal.
    
      - When you create your character, choose two of the following
        benefits. You gain the chosen benefits while in Hybrid form.
        
          - Claws: you have claws that do 2d10 DV, at -2 AP.
          - Teeth: You have a predator’s jaw, which allows you to bite
            foes. The bite does 1d10+2 DV at -2 AP. When you bite
            someone, if you score an Excellent Success, you may choose
            to *latch on*; this normally works like grappling the
            target.
          - Hearing: You have superb hearing, gaining +20 on auditory
            Perception checks.
          - Movement: you gain one of the following movement modes (in
            addition to your other movement modes): Burrow 1 / 3, Climb
            3 / 9, Flight 3 / 9 / 36, Glide 4 / 12 / 48, Hop 4 / 12,
            Swim 3 / 9
          - Scent: you have a superb sense of smell; you gain the Scent
            sense.
          - Environment Adaptation: choose a hostile environment; you
            gain an adaptation that allows you to survive this
            environment. For example, you might choose to survive in
            extreme cold, and thus gain a blubber layer.
          - Motion-Sensitivity: your vision becomes very sensitive to
            motion. You gain +10 to Perception tests made against moving
            targets.
          - Sprinter: choose one movement mode and increase it by +1/+3
            (for example, Walking 4/12 would become Walking 5/15).
          - Thick Hide: You gain +1 armor.

  - *Fast-Healing*: you have Fast Healing 1

  - Optional Trait: Animal Form.
    
      - If you purchase this trait, you gain an Animal form as well.
        Your animal form resembles a normal member of your Animal type.
        Your animal form can’t be too large (as large as an elephant,
        larger than size Large) or too small (as small as a cricket,
        smaller than size Small).

  - Optional Trait: Enhanced Hybrid Form
    
      - You can choose two more benefits for your Hybrid Form.

## Uncommon races

### Clay Men

  - ancient, amorphous race. No internal organs or specialized tissues.
    Cannot make precise shapes. Have a texture and appearance somewhat
    like a giant mass of clay. (Can produce a wide variety of sounds,
    including speech, with surface vibrations.)

  - DUR 35, STR 20

  - \+5 SAV, +5 WIL

  - Movement: Burrow 3 / 9, Surface 3 / 9, Swim 4 / 12

  - Senses: Infra-Red, Mage Sight, Tremor Sense

  - Tags: Supernatural, Shape-Shifter, Amorphous, Clay Men

  - Language Groups: CM

  - *Amorphous*: Clay Men are amorphous, and can manipulate their shape
    at will; they can stretch, narrow, ball up, flatten out, and so on.
    They cannot produce fine features, or alter their texture or color
    (other than to grip, as in *Pseudopods* below), and thus they cannot
    mimic specific people or objects. However, they can slip through
    small spaces, and they can be almost impossible to grapple or
    restrain effectively.

  - *No Vital Organs*: Clay Men do not have vital organs, and thus they
    are not vulnerable to attacks or powers that rely on targeting weak
    points or vital organs.
    
      - They have Resistance to attacks with the Precision tag.

  - *No Face*: Clay Men have no particular “front” or facing, and they
    have no discrete sensory organs – so they can perceive all around
    themselves, including directly above and below themselves.

  - *Pseudopods*: Clay Men can extend pseudopods. They can extend up to
    four pseudopods, each up to a meter long. They can manifest one
    fewer pseudopod to make on other pseudopod one meter longer (so they
    could, for example, extrude one four-meter pseudopod, or two
    two-meter pseudopods).

  - *No Bones*: Lacking a skeletal structure, Clay Men cannot take
    advantage of leverage; this severely reduces their ability to deploy
    their strength. Their damage bonus when using melee weapons is 0.
    This ability may have other consequences as well.

  - Envelop: Clay Men have a unique form of physical combat available to
    them: simply enveloping (and then digesting) an enemy. Enveloping
    works much like Grappling, except that a successfully enveloped
    enemy takes 1d10÷2 DV per turn while enveloped (this damage has the
    Chemical tag). Enveloped targets are normally held immobile, but, if
    they succeed on a STR+SOM check, they can deal damage to the Clay
    Man with any weapon they are holding (or any natural weapon).

  - *Fast Healing*: Clay Men have Fast Healing 1

  - *Powered*: Clay Men have internal supernatural process that help to
    keep them going. They need to breath (by exchanging oxygen through
    their surface), but they can extract oxygen from water as well as
    breathing air. They need to eat to grow, but they need little food
    when not growing or repairing damage. They do not need to sleep.
    They can be effected by disease, but are resistant to most diseases
    that affect humanoids (they have Resistance to diseases). They do
    not age.

  - Optional Trait: Color-Changing.
    
      - You can change the color of your “skin”. You can create shapes
        down to the scale of a few centimeters, which allows you to
        create large letters, or to camouflage yourself (providing you a
        +20 to Stealth).

  - Optional Trait: Rigging.
    
      - You can produce an internal support structure made of cartilage.
        You can produce and dissolve the “rigging” at will: creating it
        is a Task Action with a six hour duration, and dissolving it is
        Task Action with a three hour duration. The rigging allows you
        to take advantage of internal leverage, and thus negates the No
        Bones trait; it also increases your STR by 5. However, the
        cartilage is fragile, and it exposes you to bits of tiny broken
        cartilage tumbling through you when you are injured; it reduces
        your DUR by 5.

### Dwarves

  - A large nation of Dwarves exists, but, while affable enough, most of
    them prefer to deal with their own kind – and their own kin at that.
    Still, a few Dwarf Holds, complete with their surrounding
    territories, signed the New Charter – and were reorganized into
    Northland Province when the Compact came into effect.
  - DUR 35, STR 30
  - \+10 SOM, +10 WIL
  - Movement: foot 4 / 12
  - Senses: Normal, Infrared
  - Tags: Natural, Humanoid, Dwarf
  - Language Group: HHED
  - *Squat*: Dwarves are treated as small targets when defending against
    ranged attacks (even though they are Medium-sized creatures)

  - Optional Background: Dwarven Hold
    
      - 10 ranks in two Technical skills
      - 10 ranks in Protocol
      - 10 ranks in Barter

### Gnomes

  - Gnomes live in burrows in the lower ranges of the World Spine
    Mountains.

  - Gnome burrows reside near the surface; they are “burried shallow,”
    with surface entrances.

  - Gnome communities tend to be small; a dozen families or fewer,
    spread across as many burrows.

  - Gnomish communities tend to be isolated; they are not eager to
    receive guests, not even other Gnomes.

  - The outsiders they deal most frequently with are Kobolds, from
    burrows dug deeper underground in the World Spine Mountains.

  - Gnome communities tend to be *idiosyncratic*, owing to their limited
    outside contact.

  - Gnomish culture can blend the hedonic and the materialistic in
    strange ways. Because their communities are small and isolated, they
    are used to suffering hardship and want; however, they are also
    highly pleasure-seeking in their own way, and tend to be highly
    libertine and indulgent in the pursuit of mortal pleasure (when they
    have the opportunity).

  - As a result, they may appear to be humble, simple and rustic—until
    evening descends, when the party drugs come out.

  - Vitals:
    
      - Old Age: 130 Years
      - Average Height: 80cm
      - Average Weight: 18kg

  - DUR 25, ST 20
  - \+5 INT, +5 COO, +10 WIL
  - Movement: Foot 4 / 12
  - Senses: Normal, Low-Light
  - Tags: Natural, Humanoid, Gnome
  - Language Group: HHED
  - Size: Gnomes are Small
  - Alchemically Attuned: Gnomes double the duration of drugs, and
    Gnomes receive a +10 bonus to checks to resist the effects of drugs.

  - Optional Background: Gnomish Burrow
    
      - 10 ranks in Craft: Alchemy
      - 10 ranks in one other Technical skill
      - 10 ranks in Stealth
      - one skill kit
      - one potion of Cost: Moderate, or 5 potions of Cost: Minor
      - the Unique Outlook neutral trait
      - Special: You do not receive one dot in Common for free, the way most characters do. Instead, you receive one dot in Worldspine Kobold (group DDK).

### Halflings

  - Halflings were one of the founding races of the Commonwealth.

  - Halflings have a somewhat unique dimorphic society; the young and
    hardy travel in Caravans, trading wares and selling their skills,
    while children, the infirm and the elderly live in fixed
    settlements.

  - Halfling communities tend to form close, symbiotic relationships
    with Gnollish villages and families. Halfling communities are
    frequently built near Gnollish towns and villages; they depend on
    the Gnolls for security and labor, and the Gnolls depend on the
    Halfling caravans to sell their produce.

  - In particular, Gnolls commonly travel with Halfling caravans,
    providing security—and services like smithing, for which Halflings
    are poorly suited.

  - Caravans of Halfling traders and Gnollish guards knitted together
    the early Commonwealth, and remain on of its most iconic elements—if
    distant kindgoms know nothing else about the Commonwealth, they know
    about the trade caravans, and might have been visited by one.

  - Halflings have not grown at the rate that the other races have
    grown, and other forms of trade—notably mediated by ships sailing
    along major rivers, and along the coasts—have eclipsed the Caravans
    in the ability to move goods. Because of this, the fortunes of
    Halflings have fallen somewhat.

  - Still, the Caravans remain numerous, and are a vital carrier of
    Commonwealth trade.

  - Vitals:
    
      - Old Age: 80 Years
      - Average Height: 1m
      - Average Weight: 30kg

  - One of the Founding Races. The merchants of the early Commonwealth.
    Though they have fared well as the commonwealth has grown, their
    numbers have never grown as rapidly as other races’ have.
  - DUR 25, STR 20
  - \+5 COO, +5 INT, +5 SAV, +5 WIL
  - Movement: Foot 4 / 12
  - Senses: Normal
  - Tags: Natural, Humanoid, Halfling
  - Language Group: HHED
  - Small: Halflings are Small
  - Survivors: Halflings have a remarkable ability to endure
    adversity.  They get +10 on Feat of Endurance checks,
    and tests to resist Stress.

  - Optional Background: Caravaneer
    
      - 10 ranks in Barter
      - 10 ranks in one Technical skill
      - one Skill Kit
      - one Halfling Wagon
      - two horses
      - *This one is weird and doesn't add up to exactly 40, but I thinkt hat's OK.  I'd rather it be interesting than exactly right.*

  - Cultural Item: Halfling Caravan Cart (Cost: High)

      - Halfling Wagons are large horse-drawn carts that serve as both a mobile residence, work-space and shop for a Halfling businessperson (and possibly some business-partners or family).
      - The carts varied; the humblest is essentially a discarded human wagon with bunks hung from boards running along the sides as walls, while the most expensive are large, wood-sided structures whose internal spaces are divided into floors and rooms (though small even by the standards of Halflings).  Some are even designed to be opened up, becoming small shops once set up.
      - In general, a Halfling Wagon can comfortably accomodate up to four halflings, and provide work space enough to carry and use (when stopped and set-up) a Shop.
      - Halflings Wagons are neither light nor fast; the are two-axled, and are most often pulled by two horses.

### Herders

  - Herders are tall, thin and *roughly* humanoid—besides the layer of
    short fur, the large, deer-like eyes, the antlers and the hooves.

  - They are also *extremely* fast, and more than a little skittish.

  - The Herder where a tribal society that existed in the far West of
    the Emerald Plane.

  - Though distant from the Shade Elves, they were still within their
    reach, because the Shade Elves where commonly mounted and could
    strike far to the North.

  - The Herders formed an alliance with several other nearby tribal
    cultures, including a tribal Gnollish culture, for defense against
    the Shade Elves.

  - They were first encountered by the Commonwealth in CY 255, and
    peaceful relations where established.
    
      - Between 341 an 344, the Shade Elves heavily raided both
        Commonwealth and Herder settlements; the two allied, and
        successfully devastated the Shade Elf raiders.
      - In CY 349, the Herders signed a treaty with the Commonwealth,
        becoming allies; when the Compact was ratified, the Herders
        formally became members of the Commonwealth.

  - Herders are very social creatures; the live in large settlements in
    the open, grassy plains and gentle hills of the far West of the
    Emerald Plane.
    
      - Though they are a primitive tribal society, they cannot digest
        meat efficiently, and so they practice agriculture—using inlets
        cut from rivers to irrigate grain fields and orchards. Check
        that this makes some sense.
      - They often hunt and trap, as much for the sake of pelt,
        tradition and trade as to feed themselves
      - Their settlements are often situated near rivers, and they farm
        and fish.
      - Many of their settlements are still walled, owing to the
        continued risk of Shade Elf raids, even to the present day—and
        despite the heavy presence in the region of Commonwealth guards.

  - They are a traditional and somewhat insular people, and show little
    interest in trade or exchange with the wider Commonwealth.

  - They make excellent archers, and are extremely quick over open
    terrain, which can make them frustrating opponents for Shade Elves,
    and valuable allies for other nearby tribes (and partners for tribal
    gnolls specifically).

  - Vitals:
    
      - Old Age: 45 years
      - Average Height: 2.1m
      - Average Weight: 75kg

  - Quick, dextrous, sociable and peaceful – but also weak and frail,
    and they tend to be wary of outsiders. Dangerous at range.
  - DUR 25, STR 25
  - \+10 COO, +5 INT +5 SAV
  - Movement: Foot 6 / 18
  - Senses: Normal, Motion-Sensitive
  - Tags: Natural, Humanoid, Herder
  - Language Group: GR
  - Alert: Herders receive the Alert trait.

  - Optional Background: Herder Tribal Community
    
      - 10 ranks in Fray
      - 10 ranks in Ranged Weapons
      - 10 ranks in one Social skill
      - 10 ranks in Survival

### Orcs

  - Centuries ago, 165 years before the first Commonwealth Charter, orcs
    founded cities in the snowy Northern reaches far to the West of the
    World-Spine Mountain.
    
      - The oldest Orcish lands are located on a large, flat peninsula
        in the North-Western reaches of the Emerald Plane, separated
        from Dwarven lands by a gulf.
      - They were a tribal society: extended Families allied into Clans,
        and several Clans might cooperate to found a city.

  - They were a warlike honor-society
    
      - Orcs are large and have poor reflexes; they made poor riders,
        and so they marched to war on foot. Because of this, and their
        fractious nature, they rarely mustered large armies and marched
        to war.
      - They had ample access to sea and river; their clans built many
        small, shallow-draft long-boats, and they were terrifying
        raiders up and down the nearby coasts.
      - Threat of invasion, and promise of relief from raiding, were
        used to force other nearby societies to pay tribute; Orcs
        typically raided distant seaport cities, and the clans often
        warred among themselves.
      - For conflicts within their society, they used a system of
        ritualized combat.
      - The period before contact with the Commonwealth represents a
        golden age for the orcs, a period of wealth and power—and a time
        of misery for their neighbors.

  - Humans of the Old Empire avoided Orcish lands, using their
    tributaries as a buffer.

  - Centuries later, in CY 91, the Commonwealth began to spread west of
    the World-Spine, incorporating former Imperial human settlements and
    tribes (when willing) alike.
    
      - In CY 113, the Commonwealth allowed a tribe of Elves who the
        Orcs had claimed as tributaries to join; thereafter, the Elves
        stopped paying tribute, and the orcs sacked them.
      - This led the Commonwealth to lay siege to the Orcish clan-hold
        that launched the attack.
      - Other Orcish cities marshaled an army and attempted to break the
        siege; their attempt failed.
      - This led to 20 years of warfare between the Commonwealth; the
        Orcs were significantly outmatched by the Commonwealth military,
        and most of their tributaries were liberated. By CY 131, they
        were left with no tributaries, and were surrounded by
        Commonwealth settlements and Commonwealth-allied tribes.
      - The Commonwealth also began to fortify the coast and
        river-front; though expensive for the Commonwealth to construct,
        this effectively prevented Orc raiding, as their small and
        mobile raiding parties could not carry the means to break
        fortifications.

  - There followed a time of misery; without the tribute they depended
    on and unable to profitably raid, their society fell into decline.
    
      - They were riven by internal conflict, as individuals, families
        and clans battled over what wealth and power remained.
      - The Orcish population underwent a contraction, and their cities
        and roads suffered great neglect and decay.

  - A generation or Orcs grew up in misery, look out at the prosperous
    Commonwealth. Some went to explore it; on returning, they carried
    back stories of a prosperous, diverse society.
    
      - In CY 154, the orc Odna returned from exploring the
        Commonwealth, and began to advocate for a radical course:
        joining the Commonwealth and subscribing to their laws.
      - In CY 155, he challenged first his own clan head, and then a
        champion of the clans of his city; he won both challenges, and
        on behalf of his city and its clans, signed the Commonwealth
        Charter; thus did the city of Akala become the first Orcish city
        to join the Commonwealth.
      - Access to the Commonwealth’s markets greatly eased the misery of
        Akala; seeing their success, other movements in other clan-holds
        also sought to join the Commonwealth..

  - Today, Orcs have been members of the Commonwealth for almost 700
    years.
    
      - Orcish culture struggled to adapt itself to Commonwealth law and
        tradition: today, it is a blend of traditional Orcish elements,
        imports from the rest of the Commonwealth and uniquely Orcish
        innovations.
      - Their views on the Commonwealth and their place within it are
        complex. Though they take pride in being members of an ascendant
        and prosperous people, they also remember how they came to be
        members in it—the most traditional among their numbers claim
        that they were conquered, and that they still bear the shame of
        it.
      - Honor continues to be highly valued in Orcish society. Though
        most have taken the view that great works and labors are
        achievements worthy of honor and glory, the most traditional
        still believe that victory in combat is the greatest honor.
      - Though some orcs remain within their ancient borders and
        practice a (modified) version of their traditions, others travel
        the wider world seeking honor and accomplishment (and to bring
        wealth home, since Orcish communities still do not have adequate
        farming).
      - Unsurprisingly, many Orcs seek honor and recognition in the
        Commonwealth military. Orcs are very strong, and so many seek
        work as laborers and artisans—notably, Orcish cities boast
        impressive architecture. Orcs are also very clever, and some
        seek honor and achievement in the Commonwealth’s universities
        (Orcish scholars are generally not known for being nurturing and
        understanding mentors).
      - Notably, many Elvish communities exist near Orcish ones. Most
        orcs and elves have good relations, as they are both tribal
        cultures and have long lived near each other—for most, their
        time of conflict is centuries past and forgotten. Still, a few
        of the most traditional—in both communities—continue to nurse
        ancient grudges.

  - The Orcish people can claim 6 major cities: five are their
    traditional cities, and the sixth was established on the
    Commonwealth’s border with the Shade Elves. Of the orcs five
    traditional cities, three are members of the Commonwealth, and the
    remaining two are not.
    
      - When dealing with each other, orcs use their ancient customs,
        and orcs come and go between the Commonwealth and independent
        cities freely.
      - As a historical note, the city of Tonilac changed hands once: it
        was claimed by honorable combat by independent orcs, before
        being reclaimed by the Commonwealth six years later.
      - The city of Collac is a Commonwealth-member that was built on
        the border with the Shade Elves; it is heavily fortified, and
        the orcs there skirmish constantly with the Shade Elves, their
        allies, and their subjugate peoples.
      - Notably, the island city-state of Kethal is heavily settled by
        Orcs; in times past, it was shared amicably by Orcs and Dwarves.

  - Orcs have a vibrant mythos and rich oral history.
    
      - Orcs have several mythical heroes, about whom a great many
        stories have been told.
      - A particularly common point in Orcish Myth, which many
        historians believe corresponds to an actual event, is the Great
        Plague, an event some 15 generations ago that devastated many
        Orcish communities. The Great Pleague is frequently used a
        setting for heroic adventures of Orcish myth.
      - Over the last few hundred years, Orcs have actively transcribed
        many of these stories; their large libraries filled with
        beautifully-illuminated books are points of pride for their
        community.

  - Orcs are roughly humanoid. They are tall, lean and muscular. Their
    skin is typically either green, brown, or red; most clans will have
    one skin tone that is more common among them. Orcs also have
    prominent tusks.

  - Vitals:
    
      - Old Age: 60 years
      - Average Height: 2.2m
      - Average Weight: 90kg

  - Physically large an opposing, orcs seek honor and accomplishment in
    all things.
  - DUR 35, STR 35
  - \+5 COG, +10 SOM, +5 WIL
  - Movement: Foot 4 / 12
  - Senses: Normal, Low-Light
  - Tags: Natural, Humanoid, Orc
  - Language Groups: HHED
  - Hunter’s Senses: Orcs have acute senses of smell and hearing. They
    receive +10 to auditory and olfactory perception tests.
  - Regeneration: orcs have Fast Healing 1.

  - Optional Background: Traditional Orcish Community
    
      - 10 ranks in Intimidate
      - 10 ranks in any two Combat skills
      - 1 weapon and 1 shield

  - Optional Background: Commonwealth Orcish Community
    
      - 10 ranks in Protocol
      - 10 ranks in one Combat skill
      - 10 ranks in one Technical skill
      - 1 weapon and 1 skill kit

  - Cultural Weapon: Orcish Sabre
    
      - Orcs traditionally use a sword and shield when fighting. They
        commonly use a large back-sword—a sword with one edge, because
        they are easier to produce in large numbers. The tips are
        commonly sharpened to a point, so that they may be used for
        thrusting.
        
          - 2d10+4+DB, AP -2
          - One-Handed, Sword

  - Cultural Weapon: Orcish Sword
    
      - When Orcs fight as a unit, they use an unusual pole-arm. It
        consists of double-sided, sword-like blade, perhaps 45cm long,
        at the end of a pole 200cm long or more.
    
      - The sword-end sometimes also sports guard-like blades at its
        base.
    
      - Pole-Arms: 2d10+6+DB, AP -2
        
          - Tags: Two-Handed, Brace, Reach

### Ratfolk

  - More than 500 years ago, there was one Ratfolk civilization in the
    Warren Isles, an island chain off the Southwest near the Haven
    Isles.

  - They were organized into warrens run by families, and practiced
    fishing and farming.

  - In CY 331, 20 years before the Commonwealth started to settle Islandhome, several wealthy Ratfolk warrens united and forced their neighboring to pay tribute; they became wealthy and powerful while their kin suffored.  In the following years, other Ratfolk warlords began to rise in the Warren Isles.

  - In CY 361, the Shade Elves crossed the Shaded Sea and began to heavily raid the Warren Isles.
    
      - large numbers of Ratfolk begin fleeing the Warren Isles.
      - Some travel north to the Haven Isles, where they were eventually incorporated into the Commonwealth;
      - others fled South to the Ruby Plane, where they encountered the Raptors.

  - In CY 395, the conflict between the Warren Isles Ratfolk and the Shade Elves drags to a halt; in 398, the two form a tentative alliance, creating the Shaded Sea Peoples.
  
      - It is later learned that the "alliance" was a construct of the enigmatic Leapers.
      - The Leapers had attacked the major cities of Shade Elves and the largest warrens in the Haven Isles, and had forced both the Shade Elves and Ratfolk to pay them tribute.

  - There are now 3 distinct Ratfolk cultures:
    
      - they have a large population in the Commonwealth, first in the
        Haven Isles and now spreading throughout Heartland;
      - they are one of the two founders of the Raptor’s Alliance,
        formed with the raptors to repel Shaded Sea Peoples, including
        their “cousins”;
      - the Shaded Sea Peoples, a society consisting of Ratfolk and
        Shade Elf families.

  - Natural traders and merchants; in the Commonwealth, Ratfolk tend to
    get along well with Halflings and Humans.

  - As scavengers, they also get along well with Gnolls; Ratfolk are one
    of the few species that can eat the same food.

  - Ratfolk are one of the Commonwealth’s subterranean cultures; they
    often dwell in underground burrows.

  - Though Ratfolk do maintain their own culture and tradition, they
    were heavily assimilated into the established Commonwealth culture
    that sheltered them.

  - They are comfortable in urban environments and often live beside
    other races and cultures. They are comfortable above-ground and
    underground, and often work as traders and artisans.

  - Uniquely Ratfolk settlements are often organized around warrens;
    similar to Dwarven holds, they are mixed above-ground and
    subterranean structures. They still maintain fishing and seafaring
    traditions.

  - They commonly speak Haven Isles Ratfolk (language group GR).

  - Vitals:
    
      - Old Age: 55 Years
      - Average Height: 1.25m
      - Average Weight: 34kg

  - Traders and merchants, they tend to get along well with Halflings
    and Gnolls (they’re one of few species that can eat Gnollish food
    and speak Gnollish languages). Taking very well to settled urban
    life, and growing very quickly.
  - DUR 25, STR 20
  - \+5 COG, +5 COO, +5 INT, +5 SAV
  - Movement: Foot 4 / 12
  - Senses: Normal, Infra-Red, Scent
  - Tags: Natural, Humanoid, Ratfolk
  - Language Group: GR
  - *Small*: Ratfolk are small
  - *Scavengers*: Rat-Folk are resistant to food-borne diseases. They
    receive +20 on checks against food-borne diseases.

  - Optional Background: Warren Isles Sea-Rat
    
      - The more sophisticated of the Shaded Sea People, Ratfolk are the
        shipwrights and sailors of the alliance.
      - They are still divided into Clan-oriented settlements, where
        each Clan consists of several family, each of which will
        maintain a warren and holdings.
      - They are loosely confederated, amongst themselves and with Shade
        Elves.
      - 10 ranks in Intimidate
      - 10 ranks in Profession: Pirate, Profession: Sailer or Profession: Fisher
      - 10 ranks in one combat skill
      - one weapon (of Cost: Moderate)
      - one Skill Kit
      - Special: Warren Isles Sea-Rats don’t receive one dot in Common the way most characters do.  Instead, they receive one dot in Shaded Sea Common and one dot in Shaded . They commonly speak Warren Isles Ratfolk (language group GR) natively.

  - Optional Background: Raptor’s Plane Ratfolk
    
      - The descendants of Ratfolk who fled Southward from their
        cousins, settled on the Raptor’s Plane and ultimately allied
        with the Raptors.
      - They settled on the coasts and inland jungles closest to their
        cousins, and continue to suffer heavy raiding.
      - Inland, they live in large, underground settlements, carved into
        the sides of rocky foothills.
      - On the shores, where burrowing is impractical, they live in a
        walled cities of a few thousand.
      - Still socially-inclined and natural traders, they have opened
        trade with the Commonwealth (and have been surprised to
        encounter their distant cousins in the Commonwealth’s fleets).
      - They still fish and trade along rivers and shores, although
        Shaded Sea piracy makes this dangerous.
      - 10 Ranks in Protocol
      - 10 Ranks in one Combat skill
      - 10 Ranks in one Trade Skill
      - one weapon of Cost: Moderate
      - one Skill Kit
      - Special: Emerald Plane Ratfolk don’t gain 10 ranks in Common the way most characters do; instead, they gain 10 ranks in Raptor's Common. They usually speak Jungle Ratfolk as a native language.

### Shamblers

  - Shamblers are spirits bound to plants.

  - They originated in the dense marshes of the Southern lowlands to the
    East of the World-Spine Mountains.

  - They were created when Father Cypress, a Great Spirit who admired
    mortals and wished to interact with them, created plants with
    internal processes that could support Spirits, and fashioned of
    himself Spirits who could dwell within them.

  - Owing to their ability to root, Shambler communities lack cleared
    fields and grazing-lands—they also tend to have an active night
    life.

  - Despite being the children of a Great Spirit associated with
    isolated, deep swamps, Shamblers can be surprisingly urbane; they
    are welcoming of outsiders, and host many artisans and traders.

  - Shamblers are inquisitive, and their ability to root makes them
    light travelers; they therefore spawn many adventurers, explorers
    and wanderers.

  - Vitals:
    
      - Old Age: Unknown
      - Average Height: 1.8m
      - Average Weight: 60kg

  - Spirits bound to plants.

  - DUR 35, STR 30

  - \+10 INT, +5 SOM, +5 WIL

  - Movement: Foot 4 / 12

  - Senses: Normal, Mage-Sight

  - Tags: Supernatural, Humanoid, Shambler

  - Language Groups: HHED

  - *Rooting*: shamblers can *root*: when rooted, shamblers look more
    like natural trees (they may attempt a Disguise check to pass as a
    natural tree). While rooted, Shamblers have Fast Healing 2.
    
      - It is a one minute Task Action to either root or unroot.
      - If a shambler roots for 1 hour (in a location with access to
        sunlight, in good soil), then they will not need to otherwise
        eat, sleep or drink for 24 hours.

  - Optional Background: Shambler Community
    
      - 10 ranks in two Technical skills
      - 10 ranks in Survival
      - one Skill Kit
      - one weapon (of Cost: Moderate)

### Tempters

  - Vitals:
    
      - Old Age: None
      - Average Height: by shape
      - Average Weight: by shape

  - shape-shifting spirit beings. Charming and suave, but also very frail.

  - They can shape shift freely.
  
  - They tend to live in urban centers among other races. Some Tempters live openly among the large cities of the Commonwealth; more almost certainly live in secret.

  - DUR 30, STR 30

  - \+5 INT, +5 SAV, +5 WIL

  - Movement: Shape-Dependant (usually Foot 4/12)

  - Senses: Normal, Mage-Sight

  - Tags: Spirit, Shape-Shifter, Tempter

  - Language Group: any

  - *Appearance of Flesh*: Even though Tempters are spirits, they are bound to the nature of flesh;they have a physical form, they can be wounded and killed, they can sicken, and they need to eat, drink, breath and sleep just like mortal beings.  More than that, it is required of them that their form always resemble that of a flesh-and-blood creature&mdash;although they can control their form at will.

      - However, because they are so bound to the nature of flesh, they are not immediately obvious as spirits to those with Mage Sight.  For someone with Mage Sight to recognize a Tempter, a detailed examination is required; this is a 10 minute task action, requiring either a Search or Spellcraft check at -20.

  - *Shape-Shifting*: Tempters can take the form of any medium-sized natural creature. They can control the details of their physical form as they wish, including being able to mimic specific individuals.
    
      - They can change shape as a Standard Action.
      - Assuming the form of a *specific* individual requires a Disguise check at +10.
      - To competently impersonate a person whose shape they have assumed, they will still need to use the Disguise and Deception skills, but they receive a +30 and +10 bonus on these checks, respectively.
      - Normally, changing shape does not affect their statistics&mdash;but see the powers listed below.

  - *Basin*: As other Spirits, Tempters have a basin&mdash;something that they draw their vitality from, and over which they have power.  Tempters' basin is *emotion*; they can perceive and influence the emotions of others.
      
      - Mechanically, this grants Tempters a +10 bonus on most Social Skills test, and may negate some penalties to those tests as well.

  - Optional Negative Trait: Bind
    
      - You have a *bind*, the details of which you should work out with
        your GM. The bind should pose a real danger to you. It must be
        known to at least one clerical organization in the area where
        you live – although it does not need to be widely known. (This
        is a negative trait; it you select it, you *gain* 10 CP, which
        you may then spend elsewhere.)

  - Optional Power: More than Form Alone

      - More than simply assuming the shape of a given race, you can adopt some of their nature.
      - When you assume the form of a given race, you may choose one Aptitude in which that race has a bonus; you gain a +5 bonus to the chosen aptitude.
      - You may choose STR or DUR if that race has a higher STR or DUR than you do.
      - You must choose either INT, SAV or WIL and take a -5 penalty to that aptitude.

  - Optional Power: To Crawl and Soar

      - You can mimic the construction of other races well enough that you gain some of their biological capabilities.
      - When you assume the form of a given race, you may choose two of the following:
          - One Movement Mode that race has.
          - One Sense that race has.
          - That race's armor bonus (not more than +3).
          - One natural attack that race has.

  - Optional Class: Master Shifter

      - Requires: either the *More than Form Alone* or *To Crawl and Soar* power (or both)
      - When you assume a new form, you may choose one of the following:
          - If you have the *More than Form Alone* power, you may choose a second aptitude to gain a bonus in, using the same rules as the first.  (You don't have to take another -5 penalty.)
          - If you have the *To Crawl and Soar* power, you choose two additional bonuses.
          - You may take the form of a race with the Empowered tag.  (Normally, you could only take the form of a Natural creature.)

  - Optional Class: Empath
  
      - You have extensively developed your race's empathic talents, enabling you to sense and manipulate the emotions of others without needing to interact with them socially.
      - You can sense the emotions of those near you (roughly, those within 10 meters, although you may be able to read intense emotion from further away).
      - Manipulating other's emotions is a 5 Turn Task Action; it requires either a Control Check or a SAV+WIL+WIL check, and is opposed by the target's INT+WIL.  If you use your SAV+WIL+WIL then exceptional and critical successes are ignored.  

## Neighboring Races

### Elf-Human Hybrid

  - Elves and Humans are almost unique in that they are one of the few pairings of distinct races who can produce offspring together; however, doing so is not without complication.
      - These half-human, half-elven children are almost always sterile; furthermore, while they are curiously immune to many inherited diseases that humans and elves are prone to, they are vulnerable to many unique defects all their own.
      - There are two notable populations of non-sterile elven-human hybrids: the Haffa, who live primarily in a their own kingdom in the Kingdoms of Men; and the Shifter tribes living to the West of the Worldspine Mountains.
      - The Haffa are the product of great fortune, magical intervention and selective breeding.
      - The origins of the Shifters are lost to history; perhaps obviously, they have been influenced by far more exotic forces than merely having a mix of elven and human blood.  (As such, Shifters are usually regarded as a separate race, and have their own entry.)
  - “First generation” elf-human hybrids often have no culture of their own; they are often born into an elven or human culture somewhere in the Commonwealth.
      - Especially in Westward Province, Commonwealth cities and towns often develop a shared local culture with Wood Elven tribes near them.  In these areas, hybrids are a familiar site—if not precisely common, since they usually cannot reproduce themselves.
  - One of the few populations of non-sterile elf-human hybrids exists in the Kingdoms of Men: the Haffa.
  - Vitals:
      - Old Age: 160 years
      - Average Height: 1.8m
      - Average Weight: 60kg

  - DUR 30, STR 30
  - \+5 COG +5 COO +5 INT +5 SAV
  - Movement: Foot 4/12
  - Senses: Normal, Low-Light
  - Tags: Natural, Humanoid, Human, Elf
  - Language Group: HHED
  - Keen Senses: elf-human hybrids (usually) inherit their Elven parent’s keen senses.  They gain a +10 bonus to visual and auditory perception checks.
  - Prehensile Feet: elf-human hybrids also (usually) inherit their Elven parent’s prehensile feet, although without the robust structure that makes them resistant to injury.  While hybrids gain the benefit of prehensile feet, their feet are also fragile and apt to suffer injury (this would be likely if an Athletics check is critically failed, for example).
  - Endurance: Hybrid gain a measure of the remarkable endurance of humans; they gain a +10 bonus to Feat of Endurance checks.

### Goblins

  - These creatures have a thick, tan hide, and are protected on their upper back, arms and legs by bony plates.
    
  - Though a small number have filtered into the Commonwealth, most of them have remained within their traditional lands, and are citizens of the Goblin Empire.

  - DUR 30, STR 30

  - \+5 INT, +5 SOM, +5 WIL

  - Movement: Foot 4/12, Burrow 2/6

  - Senses: Normal, Infrared, Scent

  - Tags: Natural, Humanoid, Goblin

  - Language Groups: HHED, GR

  - Thick Hide: Goblins have thick, bony plates on their upper back, and protecting their limbs and joints. They have +1 Armor

  - Poor Vision: Goblins have poor vision. Visual perception checks are made at -10.

  - Optional Trait: Claws
    
      - While all Goblins have large claws that allow them to tunnel,
        they are usually to awkward to be used as weapons. Yours,
        however, are particularly dangerous. You have claws:
      - 1d10+3+DB, AP -2
      - one-handed, natural

### Gremlins

  - These small creatures resemble hairless cats in gross appearance, save that they have hands rather than paws, walk upright, and are not *much* larger.

  - Their homelands where conquered by Goblin kings and warlords long ago, and they have been subjects of the Goblins for centuries.

      - Though the Goblins Code does declare that all other species are inferior to Goblins and are worthy of enslavement, it does grant some species special status over others; Gremlins are one such species.

      - Gremlins are eligible for "favored servant" status; though they are still subordinate to Goblins, Gremlins that have earned this status are afforded preferential treatment and special privilege.

      - Gremlins that have earned this status often serve as faithful retainers, performing tasks that, though they are beneath the dignity of a proper Goblin, still require trust.

      - Gremlins also often serve as soldiers or mercenaries; Gremlins may keep a rabble of lesser slaves in line, or may guard the vulnerable flanks of the Goblin's highly effective long-spear formations.

      - Favored Servant status is often passed down family lines by Gremlins, with parents grooming their offspring to continue in the service of a Goblin King, noble, warlord or family.

      - Favored servants often mark their status with tattoos, which might symbolize their lineage, the Goblin line they serve, or their deeds.

  - Gremlins are more likely than Goblins to flee the Goblin Empire and settle within the Commonwealth.

      - Gremlins that *do not* have "favored servant" status are *especially* likely to attempt to flee.

      - Gremlins that *were* favored servants are likely to receive a cold reception in the Commonwealth, especially among the small communities of Goblins and Gremlins that have settled in free lands, since other Goblin and Gremlin communities in the Commonwealth are likely to view them as traitors, collaborators and thugs.
  
  - Vitals:
      - Old Age: 50 years
      - Average Height: 1.1m
      - Average Weight: 25kg

  - DUR 25, STR 25

  - \+5 COO, +10 INT, +5 SAV

  - Movement: Climb 2/6, Foot 3/9

  - Senses: Normal, Scent

  - Tags: Natural, Humanoid, Gremlin

  - Language Groups: GR

  - Size: Gremlins are Small

  - Acute Hearing: Gremlins have good hearing; they gain +10 to auditory perception checks.

  - Claws: Gremlins have small claws, which are useful both as weapons and for grip while climbing.  Their claws are wielded with Unarmed Combat (Natural Weapons), deal 1d10+1+DB DV and have AP -1.

      - Much like cats, Gremlins also kneed with their claws; though this is for them a sign of great affection, other races often find it painful.

  - Poor Vision: Goblins have poor vision. Visual perception checks are
    made at -20.

### Raptors

  - These small creatures, as much like a reptile as a bird, are one of
    the races originally inhabiting the Raptor’s Plane.

  - They walk upright, are covered in dark-green scales, and feature
    vibrant feathers as plumage on their heads, arms, and on their short
    tails.

  - Though they are warm-blooded, they don’t handle extremes of
    temperature very well, and are most comfortable in the humid jungles
    of Raptor’s Plane.

  - They have powerful legs and nasty claws, and are natural climbers
    and leapers.

  - Hundreds of years ago, they were a society of tribal hunters: the
    young and old lived in settlements, while the healthy ranged and
    hunted in the thick jungles.

  - Contact with the Ratfolk brought them access to worked iron and
    bronze, and the two collaborated to adapt Ratfolk farming techniques
    to the deep jungle; these have helped revolutionize Raptor culture.

  - Though many of them are still hunters, they have expanded the scale
    of their agriculture significantly, and trade with Ratfolk burrows
    for finished weapons and tools.

  - Vitals:
    
      - Old Age: 50 years
      - Average Height: 1.65m
      - Average Weight: 45kg

  - DUR 30, STR 35

  - \+5 COO, +5 INT, +5 SAV, +5 SOM

  - Movement: Foot 5 / 15, Leap 5 / 15

  - Senses: Normal, Scent

  - Tags: Natural, Humanoid, Saurian, Raptor

  - Language Group: DDK

  - Scales: Raptors are covered in small scales; these provide them +1
    Armor.

  - Claws: Raptors have vicious claws on their feat, designed to grapple
    prey when pounced on from above. The have the following natural
    weapon:
    
      - Unarmed Attack, 1D10+2+DB DV, AP -2. Tags: Natural, Grab,
        Awkward Placement: Legs
      - Special: Your talons are difficult to use, being on your feet;
        they require that you pounce on someone from above, leap on them
        and pin them, or use some other similar tactic to bring them to
        bear.
      - Special: Your talons are very good at gripping those you attack,
        digging in through flesh and bone as you do so. When attacking
        with your talons, if you score an exceptional success, you
        automatically grab your opponent.

### Washers

  - The name “washers” was taken from observations of the species by early Commonwealth explorers; “Jerks” is a fair (if polite) translation of the name they have for themselves.
  - Washers are small, furry, and semi-humanoid in gross layout.
      - They are covered in dull, grey-brown fur, with a distinctive black “eye-mask” pattern on their faces and black rings around their bushy tails.
      - Washers move more naturally on all fours than they do upright; their arms and legs are unusually short and oddly-proportioned by humanoid standards.
      - Washers have extremely dexterous hands and feet, and they are very strong climbers.
      - Washers have an extraordinary sense of touch in their hands—so keen that they can better perceive a small object by feeling it than by looking at it.  Members of other races may find it cute when Washers frenetically paw small objects to examine them—and more than a little unnerving when they manipulate fine objects without looking at them.
  - Washers lived in a region in the east of the Raptor’s Plane, in the forests that bordered on the sandy, arid northeastern peninsula.
      - Tragically, that sandy, arid northeastern peninsula was the region first conquered by the Goblinoid Kings (and now ruled by the Goblin Empire).
      - Not long after discovering them, the Goblins attempted to make slaves of the Washers, highly valuing their tiny, dexterous hands; they quickly decided that the Washers’ temperament made them unsuitable for enslavement, and moved instead to eradicate them.
      - Too late did the Washers ally themselves with the Raptors and join their alliance with the Ratfolk; by this time, they only had one major city left, and a total surviving population of just more than a quarter-million.
      - Today, the Washer’s territory defines the border between the Raptor’s Alliance and the Goblinoid territories.
  - Washers have an impish sense of humor.
  - Vitals:
      - Old Age: 50 years
      - Average Height: 0.8m
      - Average Weight: 21kg

  - DUR 20, STR 20
  - \+5 COG +10 COO +5 SAV
  - Movement: Climbing 3/9, Foot 3/9, Quadruped 4/12
  - Senses: Normal, Acute Touch
  - Tags: Natural, Humanoid, Procyonid, Washers
  - Language Group: GR
  - Thief’s Hands: Washers have small, nimble hands with long, thin fingers; coupled with their incredible sense of touch, this makes them incredibly proficient lockpicks (and, more rarely, extraordinary craftsmen).  They receive a +20 bonus to tests involving the precise manipulation of small objects, including Disable Device tests, some Sleight of Hand tests, and tests using many Art and Craft skills.

## Exotic Races

### Bone Spiders

  - Bone Spiders are among the more unique races to set foot on the Emerald Plane.
      - Bone Spiders are arranged somewhat like crabs or spiders, but much larger; they have a large central section about a meter across, from which six meter-long legs extend.
      - They have a head section at one end; it is not articulated with a neck, but continuous with the body.
      - Two arms extend from the front, from slightly below the head, one on either side of it.
      - They have multiple eyes—two large ones on the head facing forward, and four smaller pairs situated around the head; this arrangement gives them more than 180 degrees of vision, and allows them to see above and below them.
      - Bone Spiders have large bone plates covering their backs, underbellies and limbs.  There are a half-dozen diamond-shaped plates on their back, which overlap at their edges a little like scale mail; the plates on their underbellies are segmented, arranged in strips.
      - Bone Spiders are semi-aquatic; they have gills on their underbellies, and can breathe underwater, though they are not particularly good swimmers.
      - Bone Spiders are omnivorous.
  - Bone Spiders only recently made contact with the Commonwealth.
      - Bone Spider explorers first discovered the Emerald Plane and the Commonwealth some twenty years ago; a trickle of Bone Spider merchants have followed.
      - Bone Spiders are from a lone island some two months’ voyage from the eastern coast of the Emerald Plane.
      - Their island is not large: it is roughly circular, and it would take shy of two weeks to cross it on food at its widest.  The island is rocky and mountainous, rising to a single low peak in its middle.
      - Along its northern and southern coasts, the rocks descend directly into the sea; besides a few lagoons, there is little arable land.
      - Along the eastern and western coasts, there are flat stretches, hosting thin bands of soil and greenery between the sandy shores and the rocky slope.
      - The Bone Spiders earliest culture began in a system of flooded caves and caverns in the center of their island.  Among their earliest myths are the stories of ascending from the deep caves to surface, and then descending form the slopes of the mountain to discover the thin crescents of fertile ground on their eastern and western coasts.
      - Bone Spiders have long practiced aquaculture in the shallows around their island, and have a long history of boat-building and sailing.
      - Only within the last hundred years did Bone Spiders begin to develop the kinds of boats that could cross the open ocean.
  - The total Bone Spider population is not large; they have largely filled in the habitable portions of their island and the shallows around it, though they number fewer than five hundred thousand.
      - Despite this fact, they seem in little hurry to expand onto the Emerald Plane.
      - They do seem eager to trade, however, and a steady trickle of Bone-Spider merchant-ships have docked at ports along the eastern and southern coasts of the Emerald Plane.
  - Those traders who do encounter these rare creatures should be advised: Bone Spiders find attempts to mimic their culture to be *very* tiresome.
  - Bone Spiders produce several varieties of beer, wine and liquor from the plants they grow in aquaculture; these exotic spirits fetch a high price in the Commonwealth's market.
      - Merchants who deal with them know that Bone Spiders will not actually drink the spirits that they sell; nor do they mistake the wax-paper containers the wine is stored in as a sign of quality.
  - Vitals:
      - Old Age: 125 years
      - Average Height: 0.5m
      - Average Length: 2.0m
      - Average Weight: 75kg

  - DUR 35, STR 30
  - \+5 SAV, +5 SOM, +10 WIL
  - Movement: Climbing 3/9, Hexapod 4/12, Swimming 2/6
  - Senses: Normal
  - Tags: Natural, Hexapod, Bone Spider
  - Language Group: HHED
  - Aquatic: Bone Spiders can breath underwater.
