---
title: "Items"
---

Items are broken into five categories: *trivial, minor, moderate, major,* and *extreme*. This mainly determines their cost when purchased at character creation. A trivial item is an item of no notable cost: a fork and a candle are trivial items. Notably, you usually shouldn’t purchase a trivial item directly; it’s usually better to buy a *skill kit* for a relevant skill than to purchase a bunch of trivial-cost items directly. A *minor* item is a single, useful item or piece of gear, like a grappling-hook or ladder. A *moderate* item is a notable item—any one weapon or piece of armor would be a medium item, as would a skill kit (see below). A *major* item plays a major roll in defining a character; this might include a magic weapon, an heirloom, a shop or a plot of land. An extreme item is exceedingly rare, exceedingly expensive, or both; a noble estate is an extreme item. (Each category corresponds to a cost level, from 1 to 5; this is compared to a character’s wealth level while bartering.)

The mages and artisans of the Commonwealth have a servicable command of
magic; while magical items tend to be rarer and more expensive than
non-magical ones, a number of common magical items (and potions) are
commonly available throughout the Commonwealth.

Notably, we provide no specific rules for designing major items,
especially magical ones; these items should be designed to suit specific
player’s preferences, and this is a process that the GM and player
should do cooperatively.

It's worth noting that this game is intended to be less gear-focused
than other fantasy adventure games (that is, for example, D\&D). The
intent is that a character is mostly defined by their Skills first, and
by their Traits, Race, Backgrounds, Classes and Powers second.

Some items have keywords. Most of these keywords do not have affects
themselves, but do interact with traits, powers and other rules.

Several of these items are heavy or cumbersome. Rather than attempting
to track item weight in detail, items that are particularly bulky are
given the *Heavy* keyword. To determine how many *Heavy* items a
character can carry without penalty, divide their STR by 10 and round
down. For every additional *Heavy* item beyond this number, the
character suffers a -10 penalty to all physical actions. Other affects
(such as fatigue or immobility) may be applied at GM discretion.

## Items by Category

  - Trivial (Cost Level 1) items
    
      - a meal
      - a candle
      - a fork
      - a local messenger

  - Minor (Cost Level 2) items
    
      - a tent
      - a knapsack
      - a bedroll
      - a ladder
      - a lantern
      - a pet (a bird, a cat, a dog, a rat)
      - a night in an inn

  - Moderate (Cost Level 3) items
    
      - a rowboat
      - a weapon
      - a suit of armor
      - a shield
      - a skill kit
      - a work animal (a horse, a guard dog)
      - a common potion or magic item
      - three day’s convalescence
      - the services of a priest

  - Major (Cost Level 4) items
    
      - a shop
      - a home
      - a significant magic item, like
        
          - a sword that glows when Orcs are near
          - a shield that shocks anyone who touches the front
          - a bow that fires ethereal arrows
          - a golem arm that is far more durable than the flesh it
            replaced
          - to do: move into the magical items section proper. Or
            weapons.
    
      - one month’s work by an artisan

  - Expensive (Cost Level 5) items
    
      - a seaworthy ship (like a Caravel)
      - an estate
      - land-holdings

## Armors

The following listings are for common types of armor. Each entry is for
a full* suit* or* set* of the given armor type (that is, helmets,
gauntlets and grieves are not purchased separately).

Armor is often heavy and cumbersome, and it is not normally possible to
wear more than one suit of armor at a time. **Layerable** armors are an
exception: they can be worn under (or sometimes over) other armors to
provide an additional benefit. Besides your primary armor, you can wear
a second set of armor under or over it, but only if the second set has
the layerable tag.

Most people only wear armor if they are either going into battle or are
performing some ceremonial role; wearing armor while eating, dinner or
doing business would be considered extremely unusual at best (which
might impose penalties to social skills checks, and would make it nearly
impossible to blend into a crowd). **Sociable** armors are an exception;
either because they are accepted as normal attire in some cultures, or
because they are not obvious as armor, they can be worn in social
situations without seeming strange.

Some armors provide protection at the cost of impairing movement,
whether by virtue of being heavy, or rigid, or awkwardly placed; these
armors have the **Cumbersome** tag.

Most armors cover most of the wearer’s body, including their head and
extremities. Some armor, however, leaves large portions of the wearer
exposed; these armors have the **Exposed** tag.

It was “Armor with the Exposed tag provides no protection on a critical
hit,” but I think that’s too extreme if we want people to actually use
partial plate. Honestly, at this point, I think maybe some of these tags
don’t need a fixed rule, so I might just ad-hoc it for the Partial
Plate.

Some armor (and other outfits) are particularly good at concealing their
wearer. Armor with the **Stealthy** tag provides the wearer with a +10
bonus to Stealth checks.

Similarly, some armors (and other garments) obscure the wearer, making
it difficult to identify them. Armor with the **Concealing** tag
provides the wearer with a +10 bonus when attempting to blend into a
crowd. They also imposes a -20 penalty on characters making Perception
to pick the wearer out of a crowd, they make it impossible to detect
items concealed with Slight of Hand, and impose a -30 penalty on Read
checks made against the wearer. These penalties do not apply to
characters who can stop and search the wearer, such as a captor.

I’m not sure what to do with the ~~Concealable~~ Stealthy tag. One
solution is to add an implicit stealth *penalty* to every other armor; I
don’t like that because it reinforces the whole “no armor for stealth
characters” thing (which might make sense but still feels formulaic). On
the other hand, if we add a stealth bonus to leather armor, that really
doesn’t make sense either: why would wearing leather armor be stealthier
than wearing, say, black clothing? We could fix *that* by adding a
“sneak suit” that’s just dark or camoflaged clothing and provides a
stealth bonus, but now every stealth build has a fixed +10 stealth bonus
from one of those items. Of all of those, I think I hate the last one
the least. … oh fuck, if we add a stealth suit, we’ll have to have a
rule somewhere that you can’t wear it with armor.

Some armor is especially visible, ostentatious or prominent; this is
often true of armors that have a ritual or ceremonial role, or armors
that are commonly worn during competition. Characters wearing armor with
the **Proud** tag will stand out in combat, and may be more likely to be
targeted by an enemy. This tag may not do enough to keep.

### Quilted Armor

A doublet or jacket consisting of layering material around thick wadding
in order to protect the wielder from impacts. An outer layer of dense
cotton weave or cured leather also protect the wearer from cuts and
scrapes. They are considered normal outer wear for the nobility of both
the Kingdoms of Men and the Dragonshire, and for guards and soldiers
deployed in cities.

Armor Value: 2 AV

Drawbacks: None

Tags: Layerable, Sociable

### Leather Armor

Boiled, hardened leather worn as a light plate. It is easily darkened
for use in the shadows, and is light enough to not require any special
training or impair the wearer's mobility. It lacks the protective
capacity of heavier armors, though.

Armor Value: 4 AV

Drawbacks: None

Tags: Stealthy

### Mail Armour

A flexible covering of metal made of interlocking rings. Intricate, but
relatively quick to weave and manufacture from the proper wire stock and
effective at stretching limited supplies of metal. Though its
flexibility makes it easier to wear, chainmail hangs heavily from the
wearer and is less effective at dispersing impacts.

Armor Value: 5 AV

Drawbacks: -5 to checks that include your COO.

Tags: Heavy

### Brigandine

Something of a mid-point between mail and plate armors, brigandine armor
consists of oblong, overlapping metal plates molded to the wearer. There
are a number of methods for holding the plates in place; one common
technique is to rivet them to a leather or fabric vest, providing a
distinctive appearance. It is somewhat easier to slip between the
individual plates with piercing weapons.

Armor Value: 7 armor

Drawbacks: -10 to checks that include your COO.

Tags: Heavy

### Partial Plate (Original)

Consisting of steel plates and leather straps, partial plate protects
only parts of the wearer. The typical layout will cover the throat,
shoulders, arms and shins in plate, though other arrangements exist,
including single plates directly over the heart and kidneys, or
gladiator sleeves.

Armor Value: 5 AV

Drawbacks: Cannot be worn with Full Plate.

Tags: Exposed, Layerable, Proud

Exposed makes sense but is (probably) awkward to manage at the table; 5
AV is way too much to be Layerable without penalty.

### Partial Plate (Edited 1)

Consisting of steel plates and leather straps, partial plate protects
only parts of the wearer. The typical layout will cover the throat,
shoulders, arms and shins in plate, though other arrangements exist,
including single plates directly over the heart and kidneys, or
gladiator sleeves.

Armor Value: 3 AV

Drawbacks: -2 INIT if layered with armor with the Heavy tag. Cannot be
worn with Full Plate.

Tags: Layerable, Proud

### Partial Plate

Consisting of steel plates and leather straps, partial plate protects
only parts of the wearer. The typical layout will cover the throat,
shoulders, arms and shins in plate, though other arrangements exist,
including single plates directly over the heart and kidneys, or
gladiator sleeves.

Armor Value: 6 AV

Drawbacks: This armor’s AV is reduced by 3 if the attacker scores an
Exceptional of Critical Success.

Tags: Exposed, Proud

### Full Plate

A full set of plate armor is among the best protection available.
Coating the wearer's body in solid plates of refined steel, it is worn
by the noble knights of the Dragonshire and Kingdoms, and by the
Commonwealth’s fearsome shock troops. The weight of the metal armour
makes some motions sluggish, but does not impair gross agility or
strength.

Armor Value: 10 AV

Drawbacks: -10 to checks that include your COO, -2 INIT

Tags: Concealing, Heavy, Proud

### Heavy Cloak

Outwear made of heavy, dense material, commonly worn by travelers and
soldiers alike. They are often enchanted or emblazoned with badges or
symbols of position and power.

Armour Value: 1 AV

Drawbacks: None

Special: Heavy Cloaks are Cost: Low

Tags: Concealing, Layerable, Sociable, Stealthy

### Stealth Suit

Individuals and cultures throughout the known world have developed
outfits designed for stealth, from webbing fastened with leaves and
foliage to simple dark clothing.

Armor Value: 0 AV

Drawbacks: None

Special: Sneak Suits are Cost: Low

Tags: Concealing, Layerable, Stealthy

## Weapons

The following is a sampling of the weapons in use throughout the world.
It is by no means complete; GMs and players should feel free to create
whatever specific weapons they desire by starting with a similar weapon
from the list and making changes as necessary.

Some weapons can be used **One-Handed**, while others require a
**Two-Handed** grip; still others are worn rather than held (and this
have the **No-Handed** tag).

Some weapons are particularly good at parrying, guarding or deflecting
attacks; these weapons have the **Defensive** tag. When you use such a
weapon to defend yourself, you gain a +10 bonus. Conversely, some
weapons may be awkward, clumsy or fragile—or, in the case of ranged
weapons, may not be designed to *strike* an opponent at all—and thus it
is very awkward to defend yourself while carrying them; these weapons
have the **Vulnerable** tag. You take a -10 penalty to your defense when
wielding such a weapon.

Similar to Vulnerability, some weapons, though they may be effective,
hinder your ability to move about; these weapons have the **Awkward**
tag. Awkward weapons impose a -10 penalty to* movement skills* while you
are wielding them.

Some weapons, commonly pole-arms, have a particularly long reach, which
provides a notable advantage; these weapons have the **Reach** tag.
Reach weapons can attack an opponent who is 1m further away (that is, if
you are using a combat grid with 1m sqaures, then you can attack people
who are 1 square away). Reach weapons also do not suffer a penalty for
attacking a mounted character.

Some weapons are particularly good at preventing an opponent from
closing; these weapons have the **Fend** tag. If you have such a weapon
and an opponent comes within reach of you, you can make an *attack of
opportunity* against them (normally, you could only make an attack of
opportunity if they attempted to move away from or past you.) This uses
all the normal rules for an attack-of-opportunity, including counting as
a reaction.

Some weapons can be braced, and used to receive a charge; these weapons
have the **Brace** tag. See *Charging* in *Combat* for the rules for
bracing to receive a charge.

Some weapons are particularly easy to use; these weapons have the
**Easy** tag. Such weapons receive a +10 bonus on attack checks.
Conversely, some weapons are very *difficult* to use; they have the
**Difficult** tag, and receive a -10 penalty on attack checks.

Some weapons are well-suited to a particular combat maneuver; these
weapons have the **Well-Suited** tag. The Well-Suited tag will always
include the specific maneuver that a weapon is used with, written as
“Well-Suited: Trip”. When using a well-suited weapon, you do not take
the listed penalty when attempting the given maneuver.

Many weapons are particularly difficult to use in confined spaces, where
drawing and swinging a weapon is difficult. Some weapons, however, can
be used effectively even when you have very little room to maneuver.
Weapons with the** Close** tag can be used in confined spaces without
penalty.

Weapons with the **Small** tag can also be used in confined spaces by
virtue of their size; however, they have other drawbacks, including
their lack of reach compared to other weapons (which imposes a -10
penalty to your attack and defense when fighting a character with a
reach advantage).

Most weapons are awkward (at best) to use while mounted; some, however,
make excellent mounted weapons. These weapons have the **cavalry** tag;
see *Mounted Combat* in *Combat* for details.

Some weapons are particularly able to bypass a defender’s guard; these
weapons have the **Bypass** tag, and impose a -20 penalty to the
defender’s defense.

This is the point where I ran out of energy. The ones that are left are:

  - Prone: this weapon can be used just as effectively while prone.
  - Loud: this weapon is very loud; it will be obvious to anyone in the
    area when it is used.
  - Single-Use: some weapons are designed to be used only once; after a
    single shot (if a ranged weapon) or single hit (if a melee weapon),
    the weapon becomes useless.
  - Soak: this weapon is particularly well-suited to delivering poisons.
  - Grip: this weapon improves grip while grappling. (Doesn’t this only
    possibly apply to the wraps?)
  - Secure: this weapon is very difficult to disarm.
  - … actually, it’s true in general that not every tag has to have a
    rule. Hmm.

Some of these should really be rewritten to just punt to the rules in
Combat. This includes at least Reach and Brace.

## No-Handed Weapons

No-handed weapons are typically *worn*, like clawed or spiked gauntlets.
Though they put a wielder at a disadvantage against someone with a
longer weapon (which will give their opponent and advantage in reach and
leverage), they do have the certain advantages—including that some of
them are not obvious as weapons.

### Hand Wraps

Wrapping a character's hands and/or feet in thin material to provide
better grip will benefit a grappler; some users might also soak the
materials in chemicals or toxins.

Tags: No-Handed, Soak, Grip, Concealable, Unarmed, Small

Damage: as unarmed strike

AP: as unarmed strike

Cost: Trivial

### Sapper Gloves

Sapper gloves are simple leather gloves that have had a heavier, stiffer
material (like lead or iron) sewn into the lining; this both provides a
stiffer impact point and protects the wearer’s hands.

Tags: No-Handed, Grip, Concealable, Unarmed, Small

Damage: As Unarmed Strike, +2

AP: As Unarmed Strike

Cost: Low

### War Gloves

Plated Gloves with individual fingers ending in bladed claws, with
spikes protruding from each knuckle. The spikes allow a wielder a
measure of armor-penetration, though they are more effective at slashing
and maiming. They were first deployed by goblins, but these simple
weapons have since spread widely.

Tags; No-handed, Bladed, Clumsy, Maiming, Small

Damage: As Unarmed Strike, +5

AP: As Unarmed Strike, +1

## One-Handed Weapons

One-handed weapons are simple to drill with, and allow a deal of
flexibility. A person with a one-handed weapon can use their free hand
to carry a shield, a second weapon, or activate devices like Torches or
levers. A single hand on the weapon means the wielder will lack the
leverage and raw power of a two-handed weapon, though certain one-handed
weapons can match the reach of polearms, or be thrown as ranged weapons.

### Knife

Knives are small, concealable weapons that come in a great variety of
designs and styles; the example here is a short blade with a single
edge. Some knives can be throw effectively. Many knives are not designed
primarily for use as weapons; they are commonly carried as utility items
by woodsman and craftsmen. Knives are commonly used by assassins and
criminals, so many knives feature channels on the blade that can hold
poisons, or hollowed handles that can be used to hold small items or
messages.

When thrown, knives use the normal range-brackets for a thrown object,
see Thrown Weapons in Combat.

Tags: One-handed, Off-Hand, Thrown, Bladed, Small, Soak, Utility

Damage: 1d10-1+DB (one-handed and thrown)

AP: 1

### Dagger

A small blade similar to a knife, save that it is longer and
double-edged, and thus more suited to thrusting. Like knives, numerous
cultures have developed variations on the dagger; purely ceremonial
forms are common. Daggers intended for combat are often carried as
tertiary weapons, though some swordsmen may carry an off-hand dagger to
assist in parrying and defense.

Notably, many Shade Elves practice an energetic and mobile fighting
style that uses daggers; the style has been inherited (and modified) by
Ash Elves as well.

Tags: One-handed, Off-hand, Bladed, Small, Soak, Defensive, Utility

Damage: 1d10+1+DB

AP: 1

### Short Sword

A short sword is any sword of up to 75cm in length, with a short handle
and large pommel. Short swords are a classic military sidearm used by
countless cultures throughout the Emerald Plane. Though they are
heavier, more difficult to wield and more expensive than other weapons
of comparable length, they are also more versatile; they can be used to
thrust and parry as well as slash, and so they can be used in tight
quarters, can be used defensively and can be used to make very precise
attacks.

Arming swords are a ubiquitous sidearm wielded by Commonwealth troops;
they have a single edge, which comes to a sharpened point at the end;
they are suitable for slashing and thrusting, and thanks in part to
being single-edged they are cheap to produce in large numbers, even when
manufactured at the high levels of quality for which the Commonwealth is
known.

Tags: One-handed, Bladed, Cavalry, Close, Defensive, Well Suited: Called
Shot

Damage: 1d10+3+DB

AP: 1

### Long Sword

A long sword is a longer, heavier sword of up to 100cm. Long swords have
longer handles, which allows for the use of a second hand for better
leverage. Though this allows the user to strike a powerful blow, the
extra weight and length also makes the weapon awkward and difficult to
use.

Tags: One-handed, Two-handed, Bladed, Heavy, Close, Defensive, Difficult

Damage: 1d10+4+DB (one-handed) 2d10+DB (two-handed)

AP: 2

### Hatchet

A short axe designed as much for use as a tool as a weapon, the hatchet
is the definition of utility. They can be used to gather firewood and
kindling, to hammer tent pegs, as a thrown weapon (though the average
hatchet is poorly weighted for this), or as a close-range weapon to fend
off an enemy. Hatchets are singularly simple to use, their handles and
blades promoting good edge alignment by virtue of design.

Tags: One-handed, Thrown, Bladed, Blunt, Simple, Utility

Damage: 1d10-1+DB (one-handed and thrown)

AP: 1

### War Axe

A war axe is any axe of up to 60cm, with either a single or double head.
War axes are common weapons found throughout the cultures of the Emerald
Plane; most consist of a long, wooden heft with a single metal blade at
the end. They are common because they are easy and cheap to make,
because they are effective even when made with poor metal, and because
they require little training for a user to be minimally effective.
Because much of their length is wooden, axes are lighter and faster than
swords—though they also offer more force behind a blow, because they are
heavily weighted towards the head. For the same reason, they are
slightly more capable of defeating armor, thanks to focusing a greater
force on a smaller point of impact.

Goblins make particularly common use of war axes, owing to their lack of
access to high-quality steel. In recent years, some Goblin smiths have
begun to attach a hook, hammer-point or spike to the back of the weapon,
intended for use against armored targets.

Tags: One-Handed, Bladed, Cavalry, Easy

Damage: 1d10+2+DB

AP: 3

### Club

A club is any arm’s-length blunt instrument used in combat—anything from
a discarded tree branch, to a rod of steel with all the trappings of a
sword, to an intricately-decorated ceremonial weapon. Perhaps
unsurprisingly, many of these weapons are particularly ineffective
against modern armor.

Tags: One-Handed, Easy, Blunt, Well Suited: Maim, Mighty Blow

Damage: 1d10+DB

AP: 0

### Mace

Maces combine the weighted head of an axe with the ease-of-use of a
club. Modern maces are designed to be simple to use and cheap to
manufacture, while being more capable of defeating armor than
clubs—though as heavy armor become more sophisticated (and better
padded\!), simple maces are once again becoming ineffective. Maces are
also commonly used by those opposed to cutting or cleaving an opponent.

Tags: One-Handed, Easy, Blunt, Well Suited: Maim, Mighty Blow

Damage: 1d10+3+DB

AP: 1

### Flanged Mace

The flanged mace is an example of a customized weapon. The flanged mace
is a variant of the mace developed in response to the effectiveness of
modern armor; it trades off the mace’s ability to maim for greater AP.

Flanged maces are a development of the mace designed to better defeat
armor; the heads are surrounded by raised ridges or flanges, which
concentrate the force of the blow on a smaller area, while being less
likely to deflect the way that blades do. Much like maces and clubs,
they are relatively easy to produce and use.

Tags: One-Handed, Easy, Blunt

Damage: 1d10+3+DB

AP: 3

### Warhammer

A weapon that has recently begun to see wider use, warhammers are
designed to defeat even sturdy, well-padded modern armors. They are
unlikely to deflect the way that blades often do, and they concentrate
all the force of a blow onto a very small area, allowing them to
punch-in and deform even heavy armor.

Tags: One-Handed, Blunt

Damage: 1d10+2+DB

AP: 5

### Short Spear

A spear is essentially a metal point affixed to a shaft anywhere from
one to two-and-a-half meters long, designed for thrusting, pushing and
piercing attacks. Spears are perhaps the simplest, oldest and yet
most-common weapons in existence. Nearly every culture on the Emerald
Plane has deployed some variant of the spear, from the forked spears of
the bone-spiders to the two-meter-long steel-pointed spears commonly
used by the troops of the Goblin Empire when they fight in formation, to
the simple iron or stone-tipped spears used by countless tribal
cultures.

Short spears can be used one or two-handed, and are particularly
effective when paired with shields and used in formation. Short spears
can also be thrown.

Tags: One-Handed, Two-Handed, Thrown, Easy, Fend

Damage: 1d10+2+DB (one-handed and thrown), 1d10+5+DB (two-handed)

AP: 2

## Two-Handed Weapons

Two-handed weapons forgo any kind of subtlety or flexibility, instead
opting for maximum weight and reach; they are large, imposing and heavy
devices for inflicting injury to an opponent. However, the lack of a
free hand can be limiting, as wielders cannot carry a (large) shield or
ranged weapon; this may leave a two-handed weapon user relying on
natural agility or heavy armor to carry them through a fight.

### Greatsword

A greatsword is a mighty, double-edged blade of up to 150cm of length.
The long handle and blade allow for a huge amount of leverage on a
swing. Many greatswords also feature a leather wrap around the base of
the sword for half-handing, in order to use the sword in tight quarters
where the length of the blade would otherwise be a problem.

Tags: Two-handed, Heavy, Bladed, Difficult, Close, Defensive

Damage: 2d10+2+DB

AP: 3

### Reaping Sword

The reaping sword is an example variant weapon. It is somewhat similar
to a greatsword, but it is designed to be used by cavalry, primarily
with the described “reaping attack”. It trades the flexibility of the
sword—represented by the Close and Defensive tags—for usability on
horseback or with mighty overhead slashes.

This Shade-Elven weapon pairs a very long handle designed for a two
handed grip with a thin, single-edged blade with a slight curve. The
weapon is designed primarily for use by their mounted raiders; it is
well-suited to ride-by attacks, where the weapon is held out to the side
and used to “reap” any targets on foot. On foot, the weapon is heavy and
awkward; it lacks a sharpened point and cannot be used for thrusting, so
it is mainly used with vicious slashing attacks.

Tags: Two-Handed, Heavy, Bladed, Cavalry, Difficult (on foot), Well
Suited: Ride-By Attack, Mighty Blow

Damage: 2d10+2+DB

AP: 3

### Battle Axe

With a meter of handle and a weighty, massive head, battle-axes offer
massive weight and leverage that allows a wielder to deal massive damage
even to an armored opponent.

Tags: Two-handed, Heavy, Bladed, Blunt, Heavy

Damage; 2d10+1+DB

AP: 5

### Lumberjack Axe

A lumberjack’s axe is a two-handed utility axe used to fell trees
(rather than people). As with any heavy, bladed object that can easily
be swung, though, they make serviceable weapons in a pinch. Since they
are common tools, they are more readily available than martial
weapons—although they are also less-suited to combat, and less
effective at dealing with armor in particular.

Tags: Two-handed, Heavy, Bladed, Blunt, Utility, Easy, Heavy

Damage: 2d10-1+DB

AP: 1

### Long Club

Anything from sturdy walking stick to a broken chunk of furniture to a
heat-treated club, a “long club” is any blunt instrument of 150
centimeters of length or more. Able to be wielded in a variety of ways,
the Long Club is capable of poking, reaching attacks, and rapid-fire
close-range strikes.

Tags: Two-handed, Blunt, Easy, Utility, Reach

Damage: 2d10+3+DB

AP: 1

### Quarterstaff

The quarterstaff is an example variant weapon. It is similar to a Long
Club, except it trades slightly lower damage and AP for a variety of
tags—including the One-Handed tag, with associated one-handed damage.

A quarterstaff is a long staff made of sturdy wood. Though they are not
as deadly as metal weapons—and are ineffective at defeating armor in
particular—they are nevertheless versatile and effective weapons. They
can be wielded in a variety of different ways; notably, several of their
basic strikes are the same as those used with swords.

Tags: One-Handed, Two-Handed, Blunt, Easy, Utility, Reach, Defensive,
Well-Suited: Trip

Damage: 1d10+3+DB (One-Handed), 2d10+1+DB

AP: 0

### Great Mace

A long, metal head atop an equally long handle, the Great Mace is a
brutal source of blunt trauma. Though a number of styles of heads exist,
from rounded metal shafts covered in spheroid studs to roughly cubical
heads with metal flanges at the corners, they tell a story of blunt,
forceful violence.

Tags: Blunt, Easy, Two-Handed, Maiming, Heavy, Well Suited: Maim, Mighty
Blow

Damage: 2d10+5+DB

AP: 2

## Pole Arms

Weapons consisting of heads mounted on long wooden hafts, pole-arms are
relatively simple to manufacture and are highly effective when used by
infantry formations. They are among the most common weapons used by
militaries throughout the Emerald Plane. Formations of infantry with
pole-arms can be an incredibly deadly force when wisely
deployed—although they can also be vulnerable if they are flanked or
forced into close combat.

### Long Spear

Longer and longer spears are being used as armor improves and mounted,
armored opponents become more common. Long spears are those that are
more than two meters long; they are primarily wielded two-handed, by
armored infantry, and cannot easily be thrown.

Formations of long-spearmen can be extremely effective, but they can
also be vulnerable if they are flanked and enveloped, or if the enemy
can effectively close with them and engage them in melee.

Tags: Two-handed, Easy, Reach, Vulnerable, Fend, Formation, Brace

Damage: 1d10+5+DB

AP: 2

Note: The combination of Vulnerable and Fend may seem a little odd.
Vulnerable means that the weapon is not very useful when defending
against an attack, while fend means that the weapon is good at keeping
an opponent at range. This makes some sense, as long spears can be used
to threaten an opponent into keeping their distance, but are not very
good at parrying or defending should an opponent manage to get close.

### Halberd

A pike with a large, flat axe blade on one side, a halberd is capable of
both thrusting and slashing attacks. Often built slightly shorter than
spears, they still benefit from the range and reach of their design.

Though halberds are used to some extent by all the peoples of the
eastern Emerald Planes, they are particularly common in the
Commonwealth’s military—so much so that they are often used as a
symbol for the Commonwealth’s military.

Tags: Two-handed, Reach, Bladed, Fend, Easy, Formation, Brace, Heavy,
Well-Suited: Dismount

Damage: 2d10+DB

AP: 2

### Lance

The traditional weapon of charging knights and heavy Cavalry. The lance
is a conical shaft of wood with a metallic, ceramic, or stone tip. War
Lances are designed to be disposable, breaking off in the target on a
successful hit. They are ill-suited to be used on foot, as they benefit
heavily from the added inertia and speed of a mounted charge, but can be
pressed into service as an awkward, heavy spear.

The knights of the Kingdoms of Men are the most common users of lances,
as humans are large and strong enough to wield the lance effectively,
but also small and nimble enough to ride a horse.

Tags: Reach, Cavalry, One-Handed, Fend, Charge, Single-Use, Barbed,
Awkward (when on foot), Difficult (when on foot), Heavy

Damage: 1d10+2+DB (stationary, on foot) 2d10+3+DB (mounted charge)

AP: 1 (stationary, on foot), 6 (mounted charge)

### Lochaber Axe

Somewhat like a halberd, but shorter (at only 150 to 180cm) and with a
heavier head. Though the weapon still has significant reach, the extra
weight and shorter shaft mean that it is more difficult to thrust the
weapon at an opponent, and so it is more difficult to keep an opponent
at a distance. Of course, the additional weight makes it a more damaging
weapon better able to penetrate armor.

Tags: Two-Handed, Reach, Bladed, Heavy, Well Suited: Dismount

Damage: 1d10+5+DB

AP: 4

### Raven’s Beak

Similar to a warhammer, but with a much longer shaft, larger head and,
customarily, a hook opposite the hammer-head, the Raven’s Beak is a
devastating weapon when used against a heavily-armored opponent.

Tags: Blunt, Two-Handed, Reach, Heavy, Well Suited: Dismount

Damage: 1D10+4+DB

AP: 6

## Ranged Weapons

Ever since the first fight, the peoples of the Emerald Plane have been
coming up with better ways to end fights from further and further away.
From primitive slings and throwing spears to modern crossbows and
gunpowder weapons, ranged weapons are useful for killing opponents
before they can kill you. Though many older ranged weapons require quite
a lot of strength to use, some newer ranged weapons don't rely as much
on the wielder's strength, instead using mechanical or chemical energy
to drive a projectile.

### Light Bow

Light bows are small bows suitable for a wide variety of uses; the class
includes modern composite bows, recurve bows, traditional short cavalry
bows, and many others. The tactical flexibility of light bows is only
amplified by the use of specialized arrows.

Both Wood and Shade elves commonly use shortbows—wood elves for their
lightness and flexibility while hunting, and shade elves as mounted
weapons for their infamous cavalry. Shade Elf mounted archers remain
terrifying soldiers in service of the Shaded Sea Peoples.

Tags: Two-Handed, Ranged, Special Ammunition, Cavalry

Damage; 2d10-1+DB

AP: 2

Range: 50m/100m/150m/200m

Reload: no action (you can select, ready and nock an arrow as part of an
attack)

### Longbow

A longbow is a bow that is 180cm in length or more. Longbows require
incredible strength to draw, and so their wielders are often some of the
largest and strongest soldiers on the battlefield. Longbows are also
very difficult to use; proficiency with the longbow almost requires the
wielder to be raised to it, and so only cultures that have a “culture of
the bow” can boast many longbowmen.

The Herders have such a “culture of the bow,” and Herder longbowmen have
long provided the Commonwealth with a powerful advantage in their
conflict with the Shaded Sea Peoples—despite the Herder’s relative lack
of brute strength. This era may be coming to a close, however, as
crossbows replace longbows even in Herders’ hands.

Some Goblin Warlords have also cultivated a mastery of the longbow; the
Goblin longbowmen so produced are coveted assets, whom Goblin kings
competed over and who the Goblin Empire now pays handsomely for.

Humans have both the strength and dexterity to make excellent
longbowmen; some kingdoms within the Kingdoms of Men practice the
longbow, and have produced some of the most proficient longbowmen that
the Emerald Plane has seen. However, these longbowmen are often drawn
from the peasant classes, and are often deployed without proper training
or equipment; this hinders their effectiveness.

Tags: Two-handed, Ranged, Special Ammunition, Difficult, Indirect

Damage: 2d10+1+DB

AP: 3

Range: 50m/100m/150m/200m

Reload: no action (you can select, ready, and nock an arrow as part of
an attack)

### Light Crossbow

A more recent innovation, the crossbows first appeared some 500 years
ago and have been improving steadily since. Light crossbows have been
replacing bows because they are much easier to use (which greatly
reduces training time), because they can be stored with a bolt readied,
and because they can hurl a bolt with incredible force (without
requiring great strength form the user).

Light crossbows are particularly common in both the Commonwealth and the
Kingdoms of Men. Notably, the Commonwealth has recently begun deploying
Kobold archers armed with light crossbows; these small creatures often
make excellent archers, and their crossbows allow them to launch a bolt
with great force despite their tiny stature. Though originally greeted
with scorn by the Kingdoms of Men and the Goblin Empire, they have since
learned to fear these quick, stealthy, and deadly archers.

Tags: Two-Handed, Ranged, Easy, Prone, Reload, Special Ammunition

Damage: 1d10+5

AP: 4

Range: 50m/100m/200m/300m

Reload: Quick Action

### Heavy Crossbow

These recent designs combine an all-steel prod with a windlass (a crank
that draws the bow). These weapons require much more time to fully draw
with the windlass, but also allow a draw-strength that no humanoid
creature could accomplish with muscle alone. Heavy Crossbows are the
modern battlefield’s premiere weapon for defeating heavy armor at range.

Owing to their much larger economy and much greater ability to produce
high-quality steel, these weapons are currently being deployed heavily
by the Commonwealth. In particular, since the Herders became
Commonwealth members proper, Herder archers equipped with
human-manufactured heavy crossbows have become a terrifying force on the
battlefield.

Tags: Two-Handed, Ranged, Easy, Prone, Reload, Specialist Ammunition,
Overcharge

Damage: 1d10+4 (standard) 2d10+8 (overcharge)

AP: 6 (standard) 8 (overcharge)

Range: 50/100/200/300

Reload: Standard Action

Special: an additional Standard Action can be taken to fully draw the
bow. When fully drawn, the weapon uses the damage and AP listed for
Overcharge.

### Sling

A leather strap with a small pouch at the middle, slings use centrifugal
force and wrist strength to propel small projectiles (often rocks or
large nuts) up to blistering speeds. Though often considered a child's
toy or a tool for hunting vermin, they can still be lethal in the right
hands.

Caravan-going Halflings make frequent use of these weapons, owing to
their small size, cheap and easy construction, ease of provision (as
they don’t require specialized ammunition), and easy concealment.

Tags: One-Handed, Easy, Ranged

Damage: 1d10+2

AP: 0

Range: 10/20/40/80

Reload: no action (you can select a projectile, pouch it, and start
swinging as part of the attack)

## Exotic Weapon

### Shade-Elf Punch Dagger

This weapon is an example variant weapon; it is based on the dagger.
These weapons are difficult to use, but they are larger than normal
daggers and more difficult to disarm.

Shade elves use these unusual weapons with an energetic and mobile
fighting style; practitioners dart forward and back quickly, making
vicious thrusts on forward lunges and parrying and guarding when they
dart back.

Tags: One-Handed, Off-Hand, Difficult, Bladed, Small, Defensive, Secure

Damage: 1d10+2+DB

AP: 1

### Flail

Military flails are one of several martial weapons derived from
agricultural tools; agricultural flails are used in threshing. Military
flails are two-handed weapons consisting of a long wooden shaft, to
which a heavy wooden or metal striking head is attached by a hinge
(which is normally little more than two interlocked metal loops); some
also feature short lengths of metal change to attach the head. Because
they are heavy and are not rigid, military flails can be awkward to
handle and swing, and some of the force of a blow is wasted; however,
they can be useful because the hinged head allows them to potentially
strike around a guard or shield.

Tags: Two-handed, Blunt, Difficult, Bypass, Well Suited: Maiming

Damage: 2d10+3+DB

AP: 1

### War-Fork

The war-fork is an example variant weapon. “Knives” are a very diverse
class of weapons, of which the war-fork is a member. War-forks loose the
utility and soak tags, and gain the Difficult tag; in exchange, though,
they gain the Catch and Well Suited: Catch and Disarm tags. Because they
have both the Catch and Well Suited: Catch tags, they are incredibly
good at trapping enemy weapons\!

Developed from an agricultural tool used in handling bails of grain,
war-forks are small, one-handed weapons consisting of a central
long-and-narrow blade, coupled with two smaller blades or tines mounted
on either side. The the central blade is usually sharpened along its
length, it is primarily useful for thrusting attacks. The unusual weapon
is somewhat difficult to use, but it is very versatile, and in
particular allows for a number of defensive techniques, including
parrying and blade-catching. These weapons are also very light, and are
often used in pairs.

Tags: One-Handed, Off-Hand, Bladed, Catch, Difficult, Defensive, Well
Suited: Catch, Well Suited: Disarm, Small

Damage: 1d10+1+DB

AP: 1

### Hand Cannon

There have been sporadic attempts to miniaturize cannons for use by
single infantry for more than 100 years, but only within the last 65
have workable hand-cannons begun to appear. Hand-cannons, as the name
implies, are much like miniature cannons; they consist of a barrel, a
chamber with a hole tapped into it, and a socket to which a longer
wooden grip is attached. The cannon is loaded by packing powder and a
projectile down the barrel, and fired by holding a lit object up to the
touch hole. Though a wide variety of projectiles can be used with
hand-cannons—among them arrows and rocks—metal balls manufactured
specifically for the purpose have become common.

Hand-cannons are heavy and awkward; while it is possible to hold it with
one hand and touch off the weapon with the other, it is difficult to do.
In practice, the weapons are often used by a pair of soldiers: one who
holds and aims the weapon while the other touches it off.

The Commonwealth are the heaviest users of these weapons, with the
Goblin Empire being a close second.

Tags: Two-Handed, Ranged, Difficult, Vulnerable, Awkward, Reload, Loud

Damage: 3d10

AP: 7

Range: 25m/50m/125m/200m

Reload: 5 Standard Actions

### Whip

Whips are common tools for managing livestock and work-animals;
they consist of long, slender pieces of tanned leather.
Though they are very painful, they are not nearly as dangerous as purpose-built weapons, they are all but useless against even the slightest armor, and cannot be used to parry or defend against a close attacker.
Nevertheless, some do use them for self-defense, as a less-lethal weapon, to disarm opponents or to move small objects at range.

Tags: One-Handed, Off-Hand, Exotic Weapon, Reach, Vulnerable, Well
Suited: Catch, Well Suited: Disarm, Well Suited: Trip

Damage: 1d10&divide;2

AP: 0

### Dragon’s Axe

The Dragon’s Axe is an example unique weapon. As the description says,
the Dragon’s Axe allows the wielder access to at least one powerful,
armor-defeating shot, without leaving them defenseless in melee combat.
Such a weapon might have an unreliable firing mechanism, or it might
have a weaker shaft (owing to it being hollow to double as a barrel)—or
it also might not\! The weapon might be perfectly servicable as both an
axe and matchlock. The choice is up to the player and the GM, and
depends on what the CP cost of the weapon is, and what kind of “feel”
the GM wants for the setting, and the player wants for their character.

A unique weapon built to order at great expense to the Dragonshire noble
that commissioned it, it was designed to make the might of gunpowder
available to its wielder without leaving them vulnerable in
close-combat. The axe’s shaft is reinforced, and also serves as the
barrel of a projectile weapon; the handle has a sophisticated,
matchlock-like mechanism to trigger the weapon.

Tags: One-Handed, Range, Bladed, Unique, Reload, Loud

Damage: 1d10+1+DB (one-handed), 1d10+5 (ranged)

AP: 1 (one-handed), 4 (ranged)

Range: 10m/20m/40m/80m

Reload: Standard Action

## Magic Items

  - Magical items largely follow the same rules as non-magical ones;
    
      - they are listed separately here because, unlike ladders and
        rope, they require descriptions.

  - Low Cost:
    
      - Light: this small glass vile contains a clear liquid. When
        shaken, it produces a bright light: it shines brightly enough
        that a character holding it can see clearly for 20m around them.
        Once it is lit, it will continue to shine brightly for 20
        minutes, and then dimly for 20 minutes thereafter—although
        shaking it again will cause it to begin shining brightly once
        more.

  - Moderate Cost:
    
      - Heater: this small magical apparatus is used to generate strong
        heat; it is commonly carried by travelers who use them to keep
        warm, to boil water and to start fires. Heaters are cylindrical
        metal devices about the size and shape of the handle to a
        hammer; the tip of one end is lain with intricate steel wiring,
        while the other end is wrapped in leather. When the device is
        activated, the wired tip becomes extremely hot. The device
        requires a charge, a narrow alchemical rod that is fed into the
        handle end. One charge is Trivial cost and will run the heater
        for 2 hours. While there is a charge in it, the heater can be
        activated and deactivated with a metal trigger in the grip.
    
      - Safe-Fall Cape: this cape billows outward as you fall, and both
        it’s physical size and magical effects cooperate to slow your
        fall. No matter how far you fall, the cape will prevent you from
        falling faster than a quick run. When you land, you must make an
        athletics check: if you succeed, you ake no damage, but if you
        fail, you take 1d10 dv.
    
      - Torque of Speaking: you may use one additional language group
        (pick one when purchasing this item).
        
          - Note that the torque is giving you access to a language
            group, and not ranks in a specific language. If you’re a
            human, you can use a torque to make the sounds needed to
            speak Gnollish (in the language-group GR), but you’d still
            need to have ranks in Language: Heartland Gnoll to actually
            speak that language.
    
      - Wand:
        
          - Attack: Indicate-Only Attack, 1d10-2 DV, Ignores Armor.
            
              - Range: 30m (short) / 50m / 70m
              - Requires 10 ranks in Spellcraft to use (no check is
                required)
        
          - Is this potentially fun or stupid?
    
      - Warmblood Suit: this heavy outfit resembles heavy winter
        clothing, with an outer layer of wool and an linen inner lining.
        
          - Just inside the linen lining there is a wrapping like a
            metallic ribbon; at several points along the back, there are
            pockets containing more of the metallic ribbons. Both sets
            of ribbons cross are connected to two magical mechanisms,
            each a twin of the other, in the back of the suit.
          - In extreme cold, the external ribbons are left rolled up in
            their pockets. When activated, the inner ribbons heat up,
            warming the wearer.
          - In extreme heat, the wearer opens the pockets and unfurls
            the ribbons, and the garment then pumps heat *out* through
            the unfurled ribbons, cooling the wearer.
          - If worn by a *warm-blooded* creature, the survival suit
            provides a +20 bonus to *Endure Physical Hardship* tests to
            survive extreme weather.
          - If worn by a *cold-blooded* creature, the survival suit
            allows the wearer to endure extremes of temperature as well
            as a warm-blooded creature.
          - The garment itself is tough, and provides some protection
            from damage. It has an armor value of 2 and has the
            Concealing, Layerable and Sociable tags.

  - Major Cost
    
      - The Bronze Arm: a magical item crafted for General Chandra to
        replace an arm lost in combat, this finely-crafted and mighty
        device has only made the general stronger.
        
          - The arm provides Chandra with +5 DUR, +5 STR and +2 AV.
          - Even though it is functionally a part of Chandra’s body, and
            he wields it as his own arm, it is still so powerful and
            durable that it counts as a weapon. Chandra can attack with
            it using either the One-Handed Weapons or Unarmed skills,
            and he is always considered armed.
    
      - The Hunter’s Bow: a magical bow carried by Aryn the hunter, it
        fires bolts of light rather than arrows.
        
          - Since the bow fires magical projectiles that it generates,
            it does not require ammo. (Note, we normally do not track
            “basic” ammo, so this detail is as much a narrative point
            as a functional rule.)
        
          - Besides functioning normally as a shortbow, the Hunter’s Bow
            has two alternate modes, controlled by a catch hidden in the
            wraps where Aryn grips it.
        
          - In “light” mode, the fired bolts do no damage, but they
            instead stick to whatever they strike and persist for
            several minutes, glowing brightly the entire time.
        
          - In “track” mode, the bolt also does no damage and also
            sticks to whatever target it strikes—but in track mode, the
            bolt can last for up to 72 hours, although only one tracker
            can be active at a time. Rather than glowing brightly,
            tracking bolts are invisible (except, of course, to someone
            with Mage Sight). Being struck with a tracker bow feels
            somewhat like being pinched, but is otherwise harmless and
            painless.
            
              - The bow pulses gently based on the whether the bow is
                facing towards the target, and it’s range; this allows
                Aryn to use the bow to track a target struck by a
                tracker.

## Alchemical Items (Chemicals, Drugs, Poisons, Potions and Bombs)

  - Minor
    
      - Stim (Drug): +2 INIT. Duration: one hour
    
      - Healing: regain 1 DUR / Day, +10 on checks made to resist
        disease. Duration: 1 Day
    
      - Numbing: negate one wound, -2 Init
    
      - Shrooms\!: +5 INT, -5 COO. Duration: one hour.
    
      - Meth\!: +3 INIT, -5 INT, -5 WIL. +10 to task actions, but cannot
        make passive checks. Duration: one hour.
    
      - Grenade (Bomb):
        
          - Attack: thrown, 2D10 DV
          - Tags: Burst and Fire
    
      - Oil (Chemical, Bomb):
        
          - Oil burns when lit.
            
              - An object covered in burning oil takes 1D10÷2 DV per
                turn, and will usually burn for about 5 minutes.
              - Oil can be put out by washing it off, covering a burning
                object in sand, or even by rolling on the ground.
        
          - Sometimes a glass or clay container is filled with oil,
            stuffed with a burning wick or rag, and thrown; these are
            called cocktails.
            
              - Attack: thrown weapon, 2m splash
              - Objects and characters splashed are covered in burning
                tar.
              - The splashed area is covered in burning tar.
              - Tags: Splash, Fire
    
      - Smoke (Bomb):
        
          - Attack: Thrown Weapon
          - Tags: Burst and Smoke
          - Produces a cloud of smoke, with a radius of 1D10+1m and
            centered where the Smoke landed.
          - Creatures in the cloud are obscured; they have Cover (see
            Combat)

  - Medium
    
      - Healing (Potion): regain 1 DUR / Hour; regain 1 Wound / 12
        Hours, after all DUR is healed. Duration: 12 hours.
        
          - Tags: Magical
    
      - Monster (Potion): Gain +10 DUR and +10 STR (this adjusts your
        WT, DR and DB). However, you also take -5 SAV and -5 INT.
        
          - Tags: Magical
    
      - Scour (Chemical, Bomb):
        
          - Scour is highly caustic; it will dissolve most solid
            objects, and will cause terrible chemical burns to flesh and
            bone.
            
              - An object or character covered in Scout takes 1D10 DV
                per turn.
              - Scour is very difficult to stop; it is thick and sticky,
                and difficult to remove.
              - Fortunately, Scour dissolves in water, making it very
                easy to wash off (if water is available).
        
          - If ingested, Scour is lethal; it deals 3D10 DV per turn
            until the character dies; fortunately, it is visually
            distinct (being a thick, pale, greenish paste), and the
            taste is obvious (and *horrible*).
        
          - Scour doesn’t dissolve glass; therefore, a bottle of it can
            be thrown.
            
              - Attack: Thrown Weapon, Splash 1D10÷2m
              - Tags: Splash, Caustic
              - Anything in the Splash is covered in Scour.
    
      - Tar (Chemical, Bomb):
        
          - This thick, black, viscous and sticky substance burns
            intensely when lit; when burning, it is very difficult to
            put out.
            
              - If an object is covered in burning tar, it takes 1D10÷2
                DV per turn.
              - Tar is very difficult to extinguish. Dropping and
                rolling will not extinguish it, and neither will pouring
                water on it.
              - Submersing an object in water will put the fire out, but
                the tar will remain hot for some time, and might
                re-ignite when exposed to air again.
        
          - Tar is often prepared in a glass or clay container with a
            lit wick, creating a device like a Cocktail:
            
              - Attack: Thrown Weapon, Splash, 1D10÷2m splash
              - Tags: Splash, Fire
              - Anything in the splash is covered in burning Tar.

## Skill Kits and Shops

  - associated with a specific skill
    
      - some skills can't be practiced *without* a skill kit

  - have the tools useful to perform that skill

  - Note: when you buy a skill kit, you may specify three Minor items
    that the kit definitely contains.
    
      - You don't have to do this, but it can be useful for declaring
        that you *definitely* have a specific item, without requiring
        you to buy many Minor or Trivial items.
      - for example, with a Craft: Blacksmithing kit, you might specify
        that it *definitely* contains a blacksmithing hammer.

  - Shops are more extensive facilities; they function like Skill Kits,
    but they allow users to pursue larger or longer-term projects. Shops
    provide a +10 bonus on tests using the linked skill.

## Creating Items

  - Characters can use their Craft skills to create items directly.
    
      - This requires an appropriate *skill kit* and raw materials to
        work with.
    
      - This requires the character succeed on an appropriate Craft
        check.
        
          - Creating a *Significant Magic Item* also requires a
            Spellcraft check.

  - Time Frames at GM’s discretion, with the following guidelines:
    
      - Minor Item: two hour Task Action
      - Moderate Item: ~~one day~~ 1 shift Job
      - Major Item: ~~one month~~ 20 shift Job

  - Raw Materials
    
      - Characters need raw materials to make things—but how do you
        determine if characters have raw materials? There isn’t a Raw
        Materials item, and there aren’t rules for it.
    
      - Our answer is: assume they have raw materials, unless there’s a
        very good reason that they don’t.
        
          - For example, if they’ve had to flee their homes at short
            notice, if they’ve been traveling light for days, or if
            they’ve been captured.
    
      - If GMs (or players) want a more definite system for tracking raw
        materials, see Raw Materials in Optional Rules.

