Secrets
-------

Throughout the book, we’ve left some important details undefined: how do
the Deep-Explorer Dwarves travel through the world? How many leapers are
there? What secrets do the Great Spirits hide?

We’ve done this deliberately; these are gaps that we intend for *GM*\ s
to fill in when they design their worlds. This means that we don’t have
to saddle GMs and players with huge amounts of “meta-plot” that they
have to keep track of—or that can spoil the surprise if players are
*already* familiar with the secret parts of the “mythos.”

Of course, the down-side of this is that GMs *have to* fill in these
blanks in order to have a completed world. What is the Ashen Mind? Maybe
a certain GM doesn’t find this question interesting—but one of their
*players* might want to incorporate it into their character, so that GM
has to come up with a good-enough answer.

For that reason, we’re going to talk about some of the setting’s Big
Questions, and discuss some of their possible answers; if you’re a GM,
you can use one of our answers, or come up with your own.

The Leapers
-----------

The Leapers are the mysterious race that formed the Shaded-Sea Peoples
by forcing the Shade Elves and Shaded-Sea Ratfolk to become their
tributaries. Most common-folk have probably never heard of them—the only
people who have seen them directly are the elites and rulers of far-away
nations. For those who *have* heard of them, they’re as like as not to
regard them as rumors and legends—stories that the brutal leaders of the
Shaded Sea use to keep their subjects in-line.

Of course, those who live underground are more likely to take the
Leapers seriously, since they’re a real and on-going threat to Dwarven
holds and Kobold cities—even if they know little about them beyond that
they exist and that they are hostile. The Leapers appear from the dark
and vanish into dead-end tunnels; no-one knows how they do this, where
they go, or even how many of them there are.

When the Leapers attack, they carry off treasure, captives and food—the
fate of those captives is unknown, although no-one suspects it’s
pleasant.

Of course, some cultures know a little more about them than others. For
one, the Clay Men have had far more contact with the Leapers than they
would like. The Clay Men have lived deep underground since time
immemorial—they likely have lived underground even longer than the
Leapers themselves have. The Clay Men have skirmished with the Leapers
since before the Empire of Man fell—and for more than three hundred
years, the Leapers have been waging a campaign of extermination against
them. The Clay Men are particularly durable and have offered a
formidable defense, but even they have slowly lost ground. One
motivation the Clay Men had for joining the Commonwealth with the
signing of the Compact was having an ally against their determined,
genocidal foe.

The Deep-Explorer Dwarves are a more recent arrival in the dark caves
and caverns deep below the surface, but, as they’ve gone deeper, they’ve
increasingly conflicted with the Leapers. Few outside their communities
know what form these conflicts have taken, or what the Deep-Explorer
Dwarves may have learned.

Of course, the generals and governors of the Commonwealth take the
Leaper threat seriously—both as the power holding the Shaded Sea
together, and a threat to Commonwealth communities underground. Much of
what they know about the Leapers comes from the Clay Men, who have
enthusiastically shared what they know, the best to prepare their new
allies to fight their common enemy. Even this leaves many important
questions unanswered.

The Few
~~~~~~~

The Ashen Mind
--------------

The *Ashen Mind* is a major part of Fire’s background. It is a
malevolent force from a domain outside the normal universe, associated
with themes of fire and ash. It cannot manifest itself directly on the
Emerald Plane—the “normal” world is a very different place from the
region it exists in; it has to find ways to *project* its influence onto
the Emerald Plane, possibly requiring it to recruit local
collaborators—or at least local patsies. Likewise, beings from the
Emerald Plane—mortal and spirit alike—cannot enter the *Ashen Fringe*
where it resides.

The Ashen Mind is ancient, hostile, and almost entirely beyond the reach
and knowledge of those on the Emerald Plane—including even Great
Spirits, whose domains may stretch over the entire Emerald Plane, but
whose power and understanding does not extend into the Fringe. No-one
knows what its ultimate goals are, why its so ceaselessly aggressive, or
if there’s any way to fight it; equally, no mortals know what role it’s
had in the affairs of the Great Spirits, or what it might know about
them.

Using the Ashen Mind
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

You have choices in how you use the Ashen Mind. It dwells in a distant
realm, with a distinct geometry, and it can’t directly enter the Emerald
Plane; so, one option is to simply ignore it. It is distant, alien, and
powerful, and it lives in an area of *strange geometry*; you can treat
it much like a figure from the Cthulhu mythos, as the driving villain
for an “out-of-context problem,” manifesting in mysterious,
space-bending anomolies swirling around mysterious cults and
conspiracies. Finally, it’s a powerful and malevolent spirit associated
with themes of fire and ash; it makes a decent stand-in for Satan if
you’d like to have a good-old-fashioned “demonic” invasion—smashing
hordes of outer-realm invaders with swords is always fun.

The Discoveries of the Goblin Empire
------------------------------------
